International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science & Technology (IJIRCST)
ISSN: 2347-5552, Volume-8, Issue-4, July 2020
https://doi.org/10.21276/ijircst.2020.8.4.2
www.ijircst.org

Movie Recommendation System Using Item
Based Collaborative Filtering
Poonam Sharma, Lokesh Yadav


ABSTRACT- In today's digital world where there is an
endless variety of content consumed such as books, videos,
articles, Films, etc., finding material of one's choice has
become an infallible task. Digital content on the other hand
Providers want to engage more and more users in their
service for maximum time. Where is it the recommender
system comes into picture where content providers advise
users by content User choice in this paper we have proposed
a movie recommendation system .Purpose of movie
recommendation system aims to provide users with
accurate movie recommendations. Usually basic
recommendation system to make recommendations
consider one of the following factors; User preference
known as content based Filtering or the preference of
similar users known as collaborative filtering. To create a
stable and accurate recommender system will use of content
based filtering.

the genre of films of their choice to specific customers.
Personalized
recommendation
engines
help
Collaborative filtering and Content-based filtering is the
predominant approach for providing recommendations
to users[2]. They are both the best the specific scenarios
are applied due to their respective fluctuations. Figure 1
& 2 show the examples of recommendation systems.

KEYWORDS- Movies, Recommendation system, CBFContent-based filtering, CF- Collaborative filtering
I. INTRODUCTION
Fig 1: Recommended product on Amazon

Recommendation system helps users to find and select
items (e.g. books, movies, restaurants) from a large
Number available on the web or other electronic
information sources. Given a large set of objects and a
Describing user needs, they offer the user a small set of
items that are well suited description. Similarly, a film
recommendation system provides a level of comfort and
personalization Helps users to interact better with the
system and watch movies that meet their needs.
Providing this level of User comfort was our primary
motivation in opting for the film recommendation
system as our BE project. The main objective of our
system is to recommend movies to our users based on
their viewing history and ratings they provide. The
system will also recommend various e-commerce
companies to promote their products[1]. Depending on

Fig 2: Recommended movies on Netflix
II. OBJECTIVE
Manuscript received June 14, 2020
Poonam Sharma, Department of Computer Science &
Engineering, Amity University, Gurgaon, Haryana, India,
(e-mail: poonamsharma.2289@gmail.com)
Lokesh Yadav, Department of Computer Science &
Engineering, Amity University, Gurgaon, Haryana, India

The Movie Recommendation System provides a
mechanism to help users categorize users with similar
interests. Basically the purpose of a recommendation
system is to search for material that will be interesting to
a person. Moreover, it involves a number of factors to
create personalized lists of useful and interesting content
specific to each user/individual. Recommendation

Copyright © 2020. Innovative Research Publication. All Rights Reserve
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3672412

266

Movie Recommendation System Using Item Based Collaborative Filtering

systems are Artificial Intelligence based algorithms that
skim through all possible options and create a
customized list of items that are interesting and relevant
to an individual. These results are based on their profile;
search/browsing history, what other people with similar
traits/demographics are watching, and how likely are
you to watch those movies. This is achieved by applying
item-based collaborative filtering.

algorithm collects from the user interest. A set of keywords
(or features) of an item is the Item profile. For example,
consider a scenario in which a person goes to buy his
favorite cake ‘X’ to a pastry. Unfortunately, cake ‘X’ has
been sold out and as a result of this the shopkeeper
recommends the person to buy cake ‘Y’ which is made up of
ingredients similar to cake ‘X’.

III. RELATED WORK
D.K. Yadav presented the movie recommendation system
a MOVREC[10] which is based on collaborative filtering
approach. Collaborative filtering makes use of
information provided by user. That information is
analyzed and a movie is recommended to the users which
are arranged with the movie with highest rating first.
The system also has a provision for user to select
attributes on which he wants the movie to be
recommended. Luis M Capos et al. [5] has analyzed two
traditional recommender systems i.e. content based
filtering and collaborative filtering. As both of them have
their own drawbacks he proposed a new system which is a
combination of Bayesian network and collaborative
filtering. The proposed system is optimized for the given
problem and provides probability distributions to make
useful inferences. A hybrid system has been presented by
Harpreet Kaur et al. [9]. A mix of collaborative as well as
content filtering algorithm is used by the system. The user
specific information or item specific information is
clubbed to form a cluster by Utkarsh Gupta et al. [12]
using chameleon. This is an efficient technique based on
Hierarchical clustering for recommender system. Urszula
Kużelewska et al. [6] proposed clustering as a way to deal
with recommender systems. Two methods of computing
cluster representatives were presented and evaluated.
Centroid-based solution and memory-based collaborative
filtering methods were used as a basis for comparing
effectiveness of the proposed two methods.
The result was a significant increase in the accuracy of the
generated recommendations when compared to just
centroid-based method. Costin-Gabriel Chiru et al. [3]
proposed Movie Recommender, a system which uses the
information known about the user to provide movie
recommendations. This system attempts to solve the
problem of unique recommendations which results from
ignoring the data specific to the user. To predict the
difficulty level of each case for each trainee Hongli LIn et
al. proposed a method called contentboosted collaborative
filtering (CBCF). There are various types of
recommender systems with different approaches and
some of them are classified in this paper:
IV. PROCEDURE AND RECOMMENDATIONS
A. Content-Based Filtering
In content-based filtering, items are recommended based on
comparisons between item profile and user profile[7]. A
user profile is content that is found to be relevant to the user
in form of keywords (or features). A set of assigned keyword
(terms, feature) might be seen by user profile which

Fig 3: Recommended movies on Netflix
We will be using the cosine similarity to calculate a
numeric quantity that denotes the similarity between two
movies. We use the cosine similarity score since it is

independent of magnitude and is relatively easy and fast
to calculate. Mathematically, it is defined as follows:
These are the following steps we'll follow: Get your index of the movie.
 Get a list of cosine similarity scores for that
particular film with all films.
 Convert it into a list of tuples where the first
element is its position and the second is the
similarity score.
 Sort the aforementioned list of tuples based on the
similarity scores; that is, the second element.
 Get the top 10 elements of this list.
 Return the titles corresponding to the indices of the
top elements.
Advantages of content-based filtering are:
 They capable of recommending unrated items.
 We can easily explain the working of recommender
system by listing the Content feature of an item.
 Content-based recommender system use needs only
the rating of the concerned user, and not any other
user of the system.
Disadvantages of content-based filtering are:

Copyright © 2020. Innovative Research Publication. All Rights Reserve
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3672412

267

International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science & Technology (IJIRCST)
ISSN: 2347-5552, Volume-8, Issue-4, July 2020
https://doi.org/10.21276/ijircst.2020.8.4.2
www.ijircst.org
 It does not work for a new user who has not rated any
item yet as enough rating are required content based
recommender evaluates the user preferences and
provide accurate recommendations.
 No recommendation of serendipitous items.
 Limited Content Analysis- The recommend does not
work if the system fails to distinguish the items that a
user likes from the items that he does not like.
B. Collaborative filtering based systems
Content based engine algorithm has several limitations.
It is only capable of suggesting movies which are close to
a certain movie. Also, the engine that we built is not
really personal in that it doesn't capture the personal
tastes and biases of a user [11]. Collaborative filtering
system recommends items based on similarity measures
between users and/or items. The system recommends
items preferred by similar users. This is based on the
scenario where a person asks his friends, who have
similar tastes, to recommend him some movies.
It is basically of two types:C. User based filtering
These systems recommend products to the user that
similar users may have liked. We can use either Pearson
correlation or cosine similarity to measure similarity
between two users. Each row represents a user and the
column represent the different movie in the matrix and
the last one record that show the similarity between the
user and the target user is except in the matrix. The
rating which is given by the user to that movie is
represented by each cell. Although computing
user-based Collaborative filtering is very simple, it
suffers from several problems. A main issue is that users'
preferences may change over time[8]. It indicates that
precompiling the matrix based on their neighboring
users may lead to bad performance. To tackle this
problem, we can apply item-based Collaborative
filtering.

user rated. Likewise, the similarity can be computed
with Pearson Correlation or Cosine Similarity[4]. The
major difference is that, with item- based collaborative
filtering, we fill in the blank vertically, as oppose to the
horizontal manner that user-based Collaborative
filtering does. It successfully avoids the problem posed
by dynamic user preference as item-based Collaborative
filtering is more static. However, several problems
remain for this method. First, the main issue is
scalability. The computation grows with both the
customer and the product. O(mn) with m users and n
items is the worst case complexity. In addition, sparsity
is another concern.

Fig 5: User based filtering
Advantages of collaborative filtering based systems:
• It is dependent on the relation between users
which implies that it is content-independent.
• They can make real quality assessment of items by
considering other peoples experience
Disadvantages of collaborative filtering are:
• Initial rater problem: Collaborative filtering systems
cannot provide recommendations for new items
because there is no user rating on which to base a
prediction.
• Gray Sheep: For a CF based system to work; a group
with similar characteristics is required. Even if such
groups exist, it will be very difficult to recommend
users who do not consistently agree or disagree to these
groups.
V. RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS

Fig 4: User based filtering
D. Item based filtering
Instead of measuring the similarity between users, the
item-based Collaborative filtering recommends items
based on their similarity with the items that the target

Recommended systems open up new opportunities to
obtain personal information over the Internet. It also
helps reduce the problem of information overload which
is a very common phenomenon with information
retrieval systems and allows users to access products and
services which are not readily available to users on the
system.
We come up with a strategy that focuses on dealing with
user’s personal interests and based on his previous
reviews, movies are recommended to users. This strategy
helps in improving accuracy of the recommendations. A

Copyright © 2020. Innovative Research Publication. All Rights Reserve
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3672412

268

Movie Recommendation System Using Item Based Collaborative Filtering

personal profile is created for each user, where each user
has access to his own history, his likes, ratings,
comments, password modification processes. It also
helps in collecting authentic data with improved
accuracy and makes the system more responsive.
This approach overcomes the drawbacks of each
individual algorithm and improves system performance.
Techniques such as clustering, similarity, and
classification are used to obtain better recommendations,
thus reducing MAE and increasing accuracy and
precision.

Fig 8: Pearson method

Fig 5: System Overview

Fig 9: Correlation of movies with count values
In future we can work on hybrid recommender using
clustering and similarity for better performance. Our
approach can be further extended to other domains to
recommend songs, video, venue, news, books, tourism
and e-commerce sites, etc.
REFERENCES
Fig 6: Rating mean graph

Fig 7: Rating count graph

[1] James Bennett, Stan Lanning ; “The Netflix Prize”, In
KDD Cup and Workshop in conjunction with KDD,2007
[2] Mohammad Yahya H. Al-Shamri , Kamal K.
Bharadwaj; “A Compact User Model for Hybrid Movie
Recommender System ” in International Conference on
Computational
Intelligence
and
Multimedia
Applications 2007
[3] Costin-Gabriel Chiru, Vladimir-Nicolae Dinu , Ctlina
Preda, Matei Macri ; “Movie Recommender System
Using the User's Psychological Profile” in IEEE
International Conference on ICCP, 2015.
[4] Christina Christakou, Leonidas Lefakis, Spyros Vrettos
and Andreas Stafylopatis; “A Movie Recommender
System Based on Semi-supervised Clustering ”, IEEE
Computer Society Washington, DC, USA 2015.
[5] Luis M. de Campos, Juan M. Fernández-Luna *, Juan F.
Huete, Miguel A. Rueda-Morales; “Combining
content-based and collaborative recommendations: A
hybrid approach based on Bayesian networks”,

Copyright © 2020. Innovative Research Publication. All Rights Reserve
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3672412

269

International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer Science & Technology (IJIRCST)
ISSN: 2347-5552, Volume-8, Issue-4, July 2020
https://doi.org/10.21276/ijircst.2020.8.4.2
www.ijircst.org
International Journal of Approximate Reasoning,
revised 2010.
[6] Urszula Kużelewska; “Clustering Algorithms in Hybrid
Recommender System on MovieLens Data”, Studies in
Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric, 2014.
[7] Dietmar Jannach, Gerhard Friedrich; “Tutorial:
Recommender
Systems”,
International
Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Beijing, August
4, 2013.
[8] Gaurangi, Eyrun, Nan; “MovieGEN: A Movie
Recommendation System”, UCSB.
[9] Harpreet Kaur Virk, Er. Maninder Singh,” Analysis and
Design of Hybrid Online Movie Recommender System
”International Journal of Innovations in Engineering
and Technology (IJIET)Volume 5 Issue 2,April 2015.
[10]Manoj Kumar, D.KYadav, Ankur Singh, Vijay Kr.
Gupta,” A Movie Recommender System: MOVREC”
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 –
8887) Volume 124 – No.3, August 2015.
[11]Prerana Khurana , Shabnam Parveen; ‘Approaches of
Recommender System: A Survey’; International
Journal of Computer Trends and Technology (IJCTT) –
Volume 34 Number 3 - April 2016.
[12]Utkarsh Gupta1 and Dr Nagamma Patil2,”
Recommender System Based on Hierarchical
Clustering Algorithm Chameleon” 2015 IEEE
International Advance Computing Conference(IACC).

Copyright © 2020. Innovative Research Publication. All Rights Reserve
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3672412

270

© May 2022 | IJIRT | Volume 8 Issue 12 | ISSN: 2349-6002

Movie Recommendation System Using Hybrid Model
Amit Nandi1, VHarshaSai2, Mohit Maity3, Vinay Kumar A4, Sridhar R5
Student, Department of Information Science and Engineering, Global Academy of
Technology, Bangalore
5
Assistant Professor, Department of Information Science and Engineering, Global Academy of
Technology, Bangalore
1,2,3,4

Abstract— In this era of fast emerging technologies and
fast paced life, an individual pays a heavy toll everyday
making them exhausted to continue the same the next
day. In such scenario entertainment plays the role of life
support. Entertainment is the tool which rejuvenates
our lost energy and will to continue. There are many
sources of entertainment, movie is one among them. For
watching movies of our choice we make use of
recommendation systems (RS), since manual searching
of similar movies of our taste might take ample time
sufficient enough to exhaust a user. Therefore, to
further elevate the efficiency of movie recommendation
systems, a hybrid model is needed. Hybrid approach
can help getting the advantages from both contentbased and collaborative filtering methods and eliminate
their short comings as well.

I.INTRODUCTION
In general, a Recommendation System is a tool for
making decisions on behalf of the user. A RS
analyses the data given by the user during their first
encounter with the system and recommends the most
likely/relevant in their next interaction. Organizations
including YouTube, Hotstar, Netflix, Amazon, etc.
use recommendation systems to ensure that their
users can identify and get the correct product
(videos/movies in case of above mentioned
platforms) what they are looking for.ARS deals with
a high volume of data/information as it ingests,
already existing data on the web along with the data
preferences of the user to accurately make decisions
that the user might like. RS, on the time of data input
from users, extracts the most relevant information,
analyses users’ preferences and interests and searches
for a match between the user and the item for
recommendation. The sole purpose of a movie
recommendation system is to predict the possibility
that a user might wish to watch a particular movie.
These recommendations may or may not be custom

IJIRT 154853

for every user, depending on the objective of each
platform. Already existing movie recommendation
systems make use of content based filtering to
provide recommendations which has been working
quite good so far. But the changing era and
expectation of instant and accurate results are putting
an urge to improve the efficiency of the existing one
sand a hybrid approach is the only way possible to do
so. As the hybrid approach has the ability to
incorporate both content-based and collaborative
filtering techniques improving the efficiency and
accuracy of the system by providing optimal results
and thus its need.
II. LITERATURE REVIEW
After the analysis of all the below papers we’ve
identified the methodologies they’ve used along with
the key findings. Walk through of the papers.
The authors of this paper gives information about
content and collaborative based filtering, explains the
drawbacks of content based filtering and also how to
counter it. They also do propose an item based CF
that improves the accuracy of a traditional
Recommendation system (RS) using KNN and cosine
similarity algorithm. KNN catches the k nearest
neighbours to a target item. Cosine similarity
calculates the similarity between 2 entities based on
cosine angle between the entities. The proposed RS
engine is different from traditional CF. Firstly after
loading the movie and the rating dataset, the rating
dataset is redesigned and movie dataset is filtered
using the item base model. Then KNN is used to get
k nearest neighbours for a target item and using the
cosine similarity similar items is found. And if the
user watches that movie then stop or else the priority
list is changed and the whole process runs again. This
improves accuracy of RS engine. The MEA (Mean

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY

525

© May 2022 | IJIRT | Volume 8 Issue 12 | ISSN: 2349-6002
Absolute Error) values showed that item based CF
had lowest MEA (0.248), compared to the content
based and model based CF and user based CF when
tested for performance. [1] The authors of this paper
focus on item based collaborative based filtering to
build a RS. They discuss the strengths of the user
based CF model and also their disadvantages like
sparsity and scalability of data and how item based
collaborative is used to counter it. A brief
introduction to Grouplens made recommendation and
Ringer is given. For the implementation of proposed
item based CF movielens and ratings dataset are used
which is provided by Grouplens. For user-item based
collaborative filtering, RS is based on the ratings
given by the user and if the user doesn’t give the
ratings the weight matrix formula is used to predict
the user ratings. For item-item based CF, cosine
similarity matrix is used. The results are compared
and the authors of the paper found out that accuracy
is lower compared to the other models but the focus
had been providing real time recommendations in
which the model stood out. [2] There exist many
algorithms to determine the neighbourhood for
collaborative filtering like KNN and Grouplens. This
paper proposes use of fuzzy clustering algorithm for
getting the neighbours. In this paper the performance
of fuzzy clustering for spherical data is compared
with the grouplens. For the grouplens algorithm the
weight of similarity is found using Pearson
coefficient. Three fuzzy clustering for spherical data
are discussed i.e. BFCS, QFCS, and KLFCS for the
research. However proposed RS engine involves
using grouplens after the clustering. For a movielens
dataset the proposed algorithm was used with 3 fuzzy
clustering algorithms and based on the AUC values it
was found that they all outperform the traditional
methods in terms of accuracy. [3]In this paper the
focus is on the item based collaborative filtering and
association rule mining and to build a baseline
recommender system using them. Amazon review
data for mobile and accessories is used for
implementation. Item based collaborative filtering is
the most relevant form of filtering technique used,
which is used in leading e commerce websites like
amazon. The proposed approach involves using both
apriori algorithm and correlation matrix on the preprocessed
dataset
to
obtain
accurate
recommendations. The authors also discuss about use
of recommendation system in the COVID 19 angle

IJIRT 154853

for recommending masks, PPE kits etc. [4]This paper
proposes a book recommender system using deep
learning technique and k-Nearest Neighbours (k-NN)
classification. This paper considers application of
Machine Learning Technology and presents a
different approach based recommender system. This
paper also explores different dimensions of a
recommendation system by analysing multiple
literature review papers. To compute the similarity of
users’ cosine similarity algorithm is used. This model
can be used to test various recommender algorithms
for performance evaluation. The knowledge gained
from this paper can be used to solve other
recommendation problems and to improve quality of
prediction and to take knowledgeable decisions in
future. [5]The paper discusses the use of genetic
algorithms in recommendation systems. The GAs
have been incorporated into RS in three ways:
clustering, hybrid models, and using the GAs without
relying on additional information obtained by hybrid
models. In general, the GA provides better results
and faster results than other traditional metrics due to
the selection of the optimal similarity function. A
traditional recommendation system is based on one
criterion or one utility function. This research work
developed a multi-level filtering technique, BLIGA.
BLIGA provides recommendations based on the GA
approach.
The
BLG
analyzes
the
best
recommendation list rather than looking for the best
items to comprise the recommendation list. It is
possible to address two limitations of this study in
future research. One limitation arises from the
specifications of the machine used in the
experiments, which made it impossible to test the
method on large datasets. The second limitation is
caused by the limited use of the genre feature of the
items for a semantic feature. As a result, other
features may be considered and tested in the
future.[6]The
recommendation
system
for
patients/dieticians is implemented for the purpose of
encouraging the patients to take nutritional
supplements, to consume food that are considered
better to meet their healthy needs, tastes, and dietary
preferences. This paper discusses the nutritional
information modeling from a cloud system and its
implementation into diet recommendation systems
based on patients' nutritional status, patient's health
assessment of foods, contradicts current nutritional
theories.
Therefore,
future
food/diet-based

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY

526

© May 2022 | IJIRT | Volume 8 Issue 12 | ISSN: 2349-6002
recommendation systems must address different
types of nutritional errors. It describes patients
relying on medicines instead of resorting to
precautionary nutritional measures in obtaining their
nutritional needs. Selecting healthy diet based on
nutritional needs has been a serious issue. Insufficient
and incorrect food consumption has been identified
as leading causes of several health challenges and
ailments. The main reason for this is the vast variety
of products and information about healthy diets.
Studies have shown that a robust diet recommended
by a Dietician or by a medical diet based Artificial
Intelligence automated cloud system can increase
longevity, protect against further diseases, and
improve quality of life overall. [7] Based on online
binary purchase data, the paper proposes an approach
to help e-commerce companies to select the good
collaborative filtering algorithms for automated
recommendation generation. In order to construct the
framework, an experimental design is applied to
binary purchase data sets with distinct input data
characteristics characterized by distinguish reduction
of data techniques, CF techniques and particular
measures for several CF configurations. Based on
their binary purchase data sets, e-commerce
companies can determine the optimal configuration
of this framework. As a result, they are able to assess
how modified input data sets affect the preferred
algorithm configuration. Prior studies have not
addressed the combination of characteristics of both
input and required algorithmic configurations. A
preprocessing step measuring the efficiency of a data
reduction technique is determined by the input
characteristics. The best data reduction technique in
terms of accuracy is CF. [8] The paper uses
clustering as a method to develop a recommender
system. The algorithms used by recommendation
systems were usually developed based on contentbased filtering, associative rules, multi-model
ensembles, and collaborative filtering. In order to
train the prediction model using multi-model
ensemble algorithms, a lot of real-world data is
necessary to create a personalized recommendation
system. Finding association rules and determining
levels of dependence among rules is done using the
Apriori algorithm. For multi-model RS, multiple
classifiers are usually used. Based on clustering, this
paper proposes a book recommendation system that
uses a variety of approaches, such as hybrid,

IJIRT 154853

knowledge-based, and utility-based. Rearrangement
of books based on user choice and review ratings are
done through clustering. The ultimate target of this
approach is to provide personalized recommendations
with improved accuracy. [9] An assessment of the
film recommendation system based on a literature
review is presented. Distinguishing different
collaborative filtering techniques is done by
comparing their performance in multiple contexts and
not only under favorable conditions. It analyses the
usage of precision and accurate based algorithms
with minimal computational time. The combination
of both content and collaborative filtering techniques
are used and measured. Future studies in various
fields could benefit from the use of new algorithms
and the applications of Machine learning algorithms
for recovering the conceptual knowledge on the
website could be particularly valuable. The paper
discusses collaboration as the most common
approach, which is based on a dataset divided into
two subsets: training and assessment. This technique
seems ideal for handling large quantities of data in
this field. [10]So according to the growing demand
for accurate results or needs, Recommendation
system came into picture, but we generally don’t get
exactly what we want as the sources are also of
various type. It is very difficult to address the
particular needs of every individual, so to fulfill the
need of particular search the discovery of
recommendation system happened in the middle of
1990’s. And in that period of time it was one of the
major steps toward research on the field of
recommendation. Recommendation system basically
recommend individual what fits into their system of
thoughts and is very much probable to their needs
and requirements. Recommendation is software
which can be separate helping software or integrated
with websites or any other software which needs
suggest probable things every individual. This paper
is focused on collaborative filtering technique. Which
also part of recommendation system where it
suggests individuals their subject to interest products
to them by their own rating and according those
whose rating are at strong similarity to them. But the
major limitation is the cold start problem as
collaborative filtering is purely focused on the
similarity of interests of the neighbors. One way we
can resolve it by is taking a step toward hybrid
approach. [11] To overcome the challenges that were

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY

527

© May 2022 | IJIRT | Volume 8 Issue 12 | ISSN: 2349-6002
related to collaborative filtering is discussed in this
paper. Basically, the main problem regarding
collaborative filtering was accuracy of the prediction
and the recommendations made to the users. To
resolve this issue researchers come with Memorybased-model methods which collect their data to
provide personalized user experience and it further
divided into two categories one is UCF (user based
collaborative filtering) and other one is ICF (item
based filtering) UCF recommend product on the basis
of similarity of user and ICF recommend product on
the basis of similar product user had used before.
Somehow it took great step but on the later phase
researcher got to know that it also fulfilling the
accuracy prediction criteria. So, they came with a
great idea of hybrid design where UCF and ICF and
linear regression model were combined which known
as rUICF which later shows great performance. [12]
This paper discusses about the recommendation
system which is basically made and personalized for
the fashion retail e-commerce users which basically
recommend the fashion product to the user which is
specific only to them. So this recommendation
system was applied to the one of the biggest Korean
company that is basically fashion based company that
deal with fashion products both on online and offline
market. The company focuses on two main things
first is, on online and offline the product is same and
second is product changes according to the demand
and season. As there is so much complexity in the
system a new method was introduced which basically
the combination of both item based collaborative
filtering algorithm and fulfilling the seasonal demand
characteristics later called as K-RecSys which is
extension of collaborative filtering. And records

show that it has given boost in selling product and
made huge profit. [13] As research has always been
an integrated part of these recommendation systems
just to make sure that user always get a satisfactory
experience and should get suggested whatever they
want to see or get. This paper is highly focused on
enhancing the previously existing system such as
collaborative filtering technique which basically
depends on user based similarity and item based
similarity
to
review
based
collaborative
recommendation. So in the new system the comments
sentiments and reviews are processed through text
mining and exploit them and according to that
recommendation are made especially for the
particular user. Although results are good from
review based collaborative filtering, but further
things are going to get more complex and vast so for
that more work on research area is needed. [14] This
paper is proper study on recommendation systems, as
we know recommendation system recommend users
through their previous data or through similar user
experiences and through relevant items data. But we
know the speed at which internet is growing and the
volume of data that is present on the internet and
different types of data. So, there is so much data
present on the internet which confuses the users, and
they go unsatisfied which leads to information
overloading. And in this point of time
Recommendation system comes and resolves this
issue. And provide users their personalized
experience. This paper also discusses about positive
and negative of different kinds of recommendation
system and serves as compass in the field of research.
[15]

III. LITERATURESUMMARY
Table 1:Summary of Literature Survey
Sl.No. Author Names

Findings

[1]

The MEA (Mean Absolute Error) values showed that item
based CF had lowest MEA compared to the content based,
model based CF and user based CF when tested for
performance.
For user-item based collaborative filtering, RS is based on the
ratings given by the user and if the user doesn’t give the
ratings the weight matrix formula is used to predict the user
ratings. For item-item based CF, cosine similarity matrix is
used. The results are compared and it is found that the
accuracy is lower compared to the other models but the focus
had been providing real time recommendations in which the

[2]

Year
of Methodology
Publication
Meenu
Gupta,
Aditya 2020
Collaborative
Thakkar,
Vishal
Gupta,
filtering
DhruvPratap SinghRathore,
Aashish
MukeshKumarKharita, Atul 2018
Collaborative
Kumar,PardeepSingh
filtering

IJIRT 154853

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY

528

© May 2022 | IJIRT | Volume 8 Issue 12 | ISSN: 2349-6002

[3]

Tadafumi
YuchiKanzawa

[4]

Jessica
Lourenco
and 2020
AparnaS. Varde
Rajesh Kumar Ojha and 2018
Dr.BhagirathiNayak
Bushra
Alhijawi, 2020
YousefKilani

[5]
[6]

Kondo, 2018

model stood out.
Collaborative For a movielens dataset the proposed algorithm was used with
filtering
and 3 fuzzy clustering algorithms and based on the AUC values it
Clustering
was found that they all outperform the traditional methods in
terms of accuracy.
Collaborative Reviewinganddiscussingaboutassociationrulesintextminingan
filtering
dapriorialgorithm.
Collaborative Analysis of KNN algorithms for recommendations.
filtering
Collaborative Analysis of multi-filtering levels of CF techniques.
filtering

IV. METHODOLOGY
The main objective to build a movie recommendation
system using a hybrid approach is to enhance the
recommendation metrics of existing systems and
provide optimal results. The proposed movie RSis
expected to generate a finer quality and accuracy than
the existing ones. The system emphasizes on reusing
the information and preferences provided by the users
that can be used in the prediction of future
recommendations. Through this project we are

IJIRT 154853

proposing a RS which provides recommendation
based on the gathered information from the web and
the information given by the users. It can be achieved
by analyzing user’s psychological profile, their
watching history, movie ratings, etc.
V. CONCLUSION
To ensure the scalability, elevate the accuracy and
enrich the quality of movie recommendations, we are
proposing a hybrid model which unifies both content-

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY

529

© May 2022 | IJIRT | Volume 8 Issue 12 | ISSN: 2349-6002
based and collaborative filtering methodologies. This
model can be used to optimize the decision making
ability of the system. Hybrid recommendation system
merges the preferences of the users with similar users
who rated the movies along with the data available on
the web to accurately recommend movies.
REFERENCE
[1] MeenuGupta, AdityaThakkar, VishalGupta,
DhruvPratap Singh Rathore, Aashish, “Movie
Recommender System Using Collaborative
Filtering”, 2020.
[2] MukeshKumarKharita, Atul Kumar, Pardeep
Singh, “Item-Based Collaborative Filteringin
Movie Recommendation in Realtime”, 2018.
[3] TadafumiKondo,YuchiKanzawa,“PerformanceC
omparisonofCollaborativeFiltering Using Fuzzy
Clustering for SphericalData”, 2018.
[4] Jessica Lourenco and Aparna S. Varde, “ItemBasedCollaborativeFilteringandAssociationRules
foraBaselineRecommenderinE-Commerce”,
2020.
[5] Rajesh Kumar Ojha and Dr. Bhagirathi Nayak,
“Application of Machine Learning in
Collaborative Filtering Recommender Systems”,
2018.
[6] BushraAlhijawi, YousefKilani, “A Collaborative
Filtering Recommender System using genetic
algorithm”, 2020.
[7] Celestine Iwendi, SulemanKhan, JosephHenry
Anajemba, AliKashif Bashir, FazalNoor,
“Realizing an Efficient IoMT-Assisted Patient
Diet Recommendation System through Machine
LearningModel”, 2019.
[8] StijnGeuens, KristofCoussement, and Koen
W.DeBock, “A framework for configuring
collaborative-filtering based recommendations
derived from purchase data”, 2018.
[9] DhimanSarma,
TanniMittra,
Mohammad
ShahadatHossain,“PersonalizedBookRecommen
dation System using Machine Learning
Algorithm”,2021.
[10] SriHariNallamala,UshaRaniBajjuri,SarvaniAnan
darao,Dr.D.DurgaPrasadandDr.PragnabanMishra
,“ABriefAnalysisofCollaborativeandContentBas
edFilteringAlgorithmsusedinRecommenderSyste
ms”,2020.

IJIRT 154853

[11] Sura
I.
Mohammad
Ali
and
SadiqSahipMajeed,“AReviewofCollaborativeFilt
eringRecommendationSystem”, 2021.
[12] ManjaiahDoddaghattaHuchaiah,MohammedFadh
elAljunid,“Anefficienthybridrecommendationmo
delbasedoncollaborativefilteringrecommendersys
tems”,2020.
[13] HyunwooHwangbo, Yang Sok Kim, Kyung
JinCha, “Recommendation system development
for fashion retail ecommerce”, 2018.
[14] Mehdi
Srifi,
Ahmed
Oussous,
AyoubAitLahcenandSalmaMouline,“Recommen
derSystemsBasedonCollaborativeFilteringUsing
ReviewTexts”,2021.
[15] F.O.Isinkaye,Y.O.Folajimi,B.A.Ojokoh,“Recom
mendationsystems:Principles,methodsandevaluat
ion”, 2018.

INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF INNOVATIVE RESEARCH IN TECHNOLOGY

530

MOVIE RECOMMENDATION SYSTEM
Amogh Singhal, Ayushi Khatri, Romyani Saha
Bachelor of Technology,
Deptartment of Inforamation Technology
SRM University, Kattankulathur Campus,
Chennai,Tamil Nadu,India
amogh_mukesh@srmuniv.edu.in
ayushikhatri_naresh@srmuniv.edu.in
romayani_gautomsaha@srmuniv.edu.in

Abstract- In today’s digital world, it has become an irksome
task to find the content of one's liking in an endless variety
of content that are being consumed like books, videos,
articles, movies, etc.On the other hand there has been an
emerging growth among the digital content providers who
want to engage as many users on their service as possible for
the maximum time. This gave birth to the recommender
system comes wherein the content providers recommend
users the content according to the users’ taste and liking. In
this paper we have implemented a movie recommendation
system. A movie recommendation is important in our social
life as it helps the user in finding the popular movies and
also based on the users interest and taste among a set of
movies.In this paper we are proposing a movie
recommendation system that has the ability to recommend
movies to a new user as well as the other existing users.It
acquires movie databases by collecting all the important
particulars including popularity and attractiveness, which
are essential for recommendation. A hybrid filtering is used
to construct our recommendation system which includes
both content based filtering and collaborative filtering.

I. INTRODUCTION
These days the users are facing problems of choosing due to
the wide variety of collection with the emerging technology
.Searching from a motel to good investment options, there is
too much information available over the internet. Companies
have deployed many recommendation systems for guiding
their users in the field of coping up with the huge collection of
data. The research in this area of recommendation systems has
been going on for quite a long time but the interest still
remains high because of the abundance of practical
applications and the problem rich domain.
Recommender systems are used for providing personalized
recommendations based on the user profile and previous

behaviour. Amazon, Netflix, and YouTube are few of the
widely used recommender systems in the Internet Industry.
Recommendation systems help the users to find and select
items (e.g., books, movies, restaurants) from the wide
collection available on the web or in other electronic
information sources. Among a large set of items and a
description of the user’s needs, they present to the user a small
set of the items that are well suited to the description. The
main purpose of our system is to recommend movies to its
users based on their viewing history and ratings that they
provide. The system will also recommend their products to
specific customers based on the genre of movies they prefer .
Collaborative filtering and content based filtering are the
prime approaches used while implementing the recommender
systems. Both the approaches have their own specific features
which makes the system more effective.In this paper we have
used the hybrid approach to increase the performance and
effectiveness of the system.

II. LITERATURE SURVEY
MOVREC [1] is a movie recommendation system presented
by D.K. Yadav et al. based on collaborative filtering approach.
Collaborative filtering makes use of information provided by
user. That information gets analyzed and based on the ratings
the movie is being recommended to the user.The system also
has a provision for user to select attributes on which he wants
the movie to be recommended.
Luis M Capos et al. [2] has analyzed two traditional
recommender systems i.e. content based filtering and
collaborative filtering. He proposed a new system which is a
combination of Bayesian network and collaborative filtering to
overcome the drawbacks of the above two sytems and the new
sytem was also provided optimization for the given problem
to make useful inferences.

A hybrid system has been presented by Harpreet Kaur et al.
[3]. The system uses a mixture of content and collaborative
filtering algorithm. While recommending both the context of
the movies ,the user-user relationship and also the user-item
relationship are considered important in the recommendation
system.
Either the user specific information or item specific
information is clubbed to form a cluster by Utkarsh Gupta et
al. [4] using chameleon. This technique is usually based on
Hierarchical clustering for recommender system and it
provides better clustering of similar items by lowering the
chances of having errors. To predict the rating of an item
voting system is used.
Urszula Kużelewska et al. [5] proposed clustering as a way to
deal with recommender systems. Two methods of computing
cluster i.e Centroid-based solution and memory-based
collaborative filtering methods, were presented and evaluated.
As compared to the centroid-based method,the end result gave
a significant increase in the accuracy.
Costin-Gabriel Chiru et al. [6] proposed Movie Recommender,
provides movie recommendations based on the known
information of the users.The psychological profile of the user,
their watching history and the data involving movie scores
from other websites are collected. They are based on
aggregate similarity calculation. The system is a
hybrid
model combination of both content based filtering and
collaborative filtering.

III. PROPOSED SYSTEM
Recommendation algorithms mainly follow collaborative
filtering, content-based filtering, demographics-based filtering
and hybrid approaches.
Collaborative filtering:-It recommends movies based on the
similarity measures between users and items. The system
recommends those movies which are preferred by users with
similar taste. Collaborative filtering has many advantages
1. It is content-independent
2. It also provides effective recommendations as it is based on
user’s similarity rather than item’s similarity.
Content based filtering:-It is based on the preferences of the
user and the description of the items.CBF algorithm
recommend items or similar to those items that were liked
earlier by the users. It examines previously rated items and
recommends best matching item.
Demographic: It provides recommendation based on the
demographic profile of the user. Recommended products can

be produced for different demographic alcove, by combining
ratings of users in those alcoves.
Knowledge-based: It suggests products based on inferences
about user’s needs and preferences. This knowledge will
sometimes contain product features that meet user needs.
Hybrid recommender: Hybrid recommender system
combines multiple recommendation techniques together to
produce the output and produces higher accuracy among all
other recommender systems. The main reason is the lack of
information about the domain dependencies in collaborative
filtering, and about the people’s preferences in content-based
system. The combination of both leads to common knowledge
increase, which provides better recommendations. It helps in
exploring new ways to extend underlying collaborative
filtering algorithms with content data and content-based
algorithms with the user behaviour data.
Step1: Use content-based predictor to calculate the pseudo
user-rating vector ‘v’ for every user ‘u’ in the
database.
  , =   , is user u rated item i
  , =   , otherwise
Step2: Weight all users with respect to similarity with the
active user.
· Similarity between users is measured as the Pearson
correlation between their ratings vectors.
Step3: Select n users that have the highest similarity with the
active user.
· These users form the neighborhood.
Step4: Compute a prediction from a weighted combination of
the selected neighbors’ ratings.
In step 2, the similarity between two users is computed using
the Pearson correlation coefficient, defined below:

Where,   , is the rating given to item i by user a ;
 ̅

is the mean rating given by user a ;
m is the total number of items .
In step 4, predictions are computed as the weighted averages
of deviations from the neighbor's mean:

Where,   , is the prediction for the active user a for item i ;
  , is the similarity between users a and u ;
n is the number of users in the neighborhood .

IV. IMPLEMENTATION
(A)

The Basic K-means Algorithm

The original K-means algorithm was proposed by MacQueen.
The ISODATA algorithm by Ball and Hall was an early but
sophisticated version of k-means. Clustering divides the
objects into meaningful groups. Clustering is unsupervised
learning. Document clustering is automatic document
organization. In K-means clustering technique K initial
centroids are taken into account, where K is the desired
number of clusters. Each point is then assigned to the cluster
by calculating thee nearest mean i.e. the centroid of the
cluster. Then we amend the centroid of each cluster based on
the points that are assigned to the cluster. We repeat the
process until there is no change in the centroid. Finally, this
algorithm aims at
minimizing an objective function, in this case a squared error
function. The objective function where, k is considered the
number of clusters and n as the number of cases is a chosen
distance measure between a data point and the cluster centre ,
is an indicator of the distance of the n data points from their
respective cluster centers. The algorithm is composed of the
following steps:

coefficient is a measure of strength and direction for two sets
of linear data. The formula for this is more complicated than
the Euclidean distance score, but it tends to give better results
in situations where the data isn’t well normalized—for
example, if critics’ movie rankings are routinely more harsh
than average. To visualize this method, you can plot the
ratings of two of the critics on a chart, as shown in figure
below. Superman was rated 3 by Mick LaSalle and 5 by Gene
Seymour, so it is placed at (3,5) on the chart.

Comparing two movie critics on a scatter plot
You can also see a straight line on the chart. This is called the
best-fit line because it covers all the closest points on the chart
as possible. If the two critics had identical ratings for every
movie, the line would be diagonal and would touch every item
in the chart, giving a perfect correlation score of 1. In the
below illustration, the critics disagree on a few movies, so the
correlation score is about 0.4. The below figure shows an
example of a much higher correlation, one of about 0.75.

Two critics with a high correlation score

(B) Pearson Correlation Score

Pearson correlation score is another approach to figure out the
preferences and taste between the users. The correlation

One interesting aspect of using the Pearson score, which you
can see in the figure, is that it corrects for grade enlargement.
In the figure, Jack Matthews tends to give higher scores than
Lisa Rose, but the line still fits because they have relatively
similar preferences. When the difference between the scores is
consistent,it becomes perfect correlation. The Euclidean
distance score described earlier brings out that inspite of
indifferences among the two critics ,their tastes are very
similar. The predictability behaviour changes depending on
our precise application. The code for the Pearson correlation
score first finds the movies rated by both critics. It then

calculates the sums and the sum of the squares of the ratings
for the two critics, and calculates the sum of the products of
their ratings. Finally, the Pearson correlation coefficient is
calculated using the above outputs. A small pseudocode is
represented below:
# Returns the Pearson correlation coefficient for p1 and p2
def sim_pearson(prefs,p1,p2):
# Get the list of mutually rated items
si={}
for item in prefs[p1]:
if item in prefs[p2]: si[item]=1
# Find the number of elements
n=len(si)
# if they are no ratings in common, return 0 if n==0: return 0
# Add up all the preferences
sum1=sum([prefs[p1][it] for it in si]) sum2=sum([prefs[p2][it]
for it in si])
# Sum up the squares sum1Sq=sum([pow(prefs[p1][it],2) for it
in si]) sum2Sq=sum([pow(prefs[p2][it],2) for it in si])
# Sum up the products pSum=sum([prefs[p1][it]*prefs[p2][it]
for it in si])
# Calculate Pearson score
num=pSum-(sum1*sum2/n)
den=sqrt((sum1Sq-pow(sum1,2)/n)*(sum2Sqpow(sum2,2)/n))
if den==0: return 0
r=num/den
return r

and Classification are used to get better recommendations thus
increasing precision and accuracy. In future we can work on
hybrid recommender using clustering and similarity for better
performance. Our approach can be further extended to other
domains to recommend songs, video, venue, news, books,
tourism and e-commerce sites, etc.

VII. REFERENCES
[1 ]Manoj Kumar, D.KYadav, Ankur Singh, Vijay Kr. Gupta,”
A Movie Recommender System: MOVREC” International
Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) Volume 124
– No.3, August 2015.
[2] Luis M. de Campos, Juan M. Fernández-Luna *, Juan F.
Huete, Miguel A. Rueda-Morales; “Combining content-based
and collaborative recommendations: A hybrid approach based
on Bayesian networks”, International Journal of Approximate
Reasoning, revised 2010.
[3] Harpreet Kaur Virk, Er. Maninder Singh,” Analysis and
Design of Hybrid Online Movie Recommender System
”International Journal of Innovations in Engineering and
Technology (IJIET)Volume 5 Issue 2,April 2015.
[4] Utkarsh Gupta1 and Dr Nagamma Patil2,” Recommender
System Based on Hierarchical Clustering Algorithm
Chameleon” 2015 IEEE International Advance Computing
Conference(IACC).

This function will return a value between –1 and 1. A value of
1 indicates similar ratings of items for every two users.Now
we can try getting the correlation score:
reload(recommendations)
print recommendations.sim_pearson(recommendations.critics,
... 'Lisa Rose','Gene Seymour')
0.396059017191

[5] Urszula Kuzelewska; “Clustering Algorithms in Hybrid
Recommender System on MovieLens Data”, Studies in Logic,
Grammar and Rhetoric, 2014.

VI. CONCLUSION

[7] K. Choi, D. Yoo, G. Kim, and Y. Suh, “A hybrid onlineproduct recommendation system: Combining implicit ratingbased collaborative filtering and sequential pattern analysis,”
Electron. Commer. Res. Appl., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 309–317,
Jul. 2012.

In this paper we have described a recommender system for
recommendation of movies. The K means has been useful for
undirected knowledge discovery and to find matches between
the similar taste of the users.Though recommender systems
have their origins in a variety of areas of research, including
information retrieval, information filtering, text classification,
etc. still we have use techniques such as machine learning and
data mining, alongside a range of concepts including
algorithms, collaborative and hybrid approaches, and
evaluation methods.
A hybrid approach is taken between context based filtering
and collaborative filtering to implement the system.It provides
efficient performance. Techniques like Clustering, Similarity

[6] Costin-Gabriel Chiru, Vladimir-Nicolae Dinu , Ctlina
Preda, Matei Macri ; “Movie Recommender System Using the
User's Psychological Profile” in IEEE International
Conference on ICCP, 2015.

[8] R. Burke, “Hybrid Web Recommender Systems,” Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 377–408, 2007.
[9] G. Groh and C. Ehmig, “Recommendations in Taste
related Domains: Collaborative Filtering vs. Social Filtering,”
In Proceedings of GROUP ’07, pp. 127–136, 2007. ACM.
[10] A. Said, E. W. De Luca, and S. Albayrak, “How Social
Relationships Affect User Similarities,” In Proceedings of the

2010 Workshop on Social Recommender Systems, pp. 1–4,
2010.
[11] H. Lee, H. Kim, “Improving Collaborative Filtering with
Rating Prediction Based on Taste Space,” Journal of Korean
Institute of
Information Scientists and Engineers, Vol.34, No.5, pp.389395, 2007.
[12] P. Li, and S. Yamada, “A Movie Recommender System
Based on Inductive Learning,” IEEE Conf. on Cybernetics and
Intelligent System, pp.318-323, 2004.
[13] W. Woerndl and J. Schlichter, “Introducing Context into
Recommender Systems,” Muenchen, Germany: Technische
Universitaet Muenchen, pp. 138-140.

[14] G. Adomavicius and A. Tuzhilin, “Context-aware
Recommender Systems,” in Recommender Systems
Handbook: A Complete Guide for Research Scientists and
Practitioners, Springer, 2010.
[15] T. Bogers, “Movie recommendation using random walks
over the contextual graph,” in Proc. of the 2nd Workshop on
Context-Aware Recommender Systems, 2010.
[16] Tang, T. Y., & McCalla, “A multi-dimensional paper
recommender: Experiments and evaluations,” IEEE Internet
Computing, 13(4),34–41, 2009.
[17] Sarwar, B. M., Karypis, G., Konstan, J. A., & Riedl,
“Item-based
collaborative
filtering
recommendation
algorithms,” In: Proceedings of the 10th international World
Wide Web conference, pp. 285–295, 2001.

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s13673-018-0161-6

(2018) 8:38

Open Access

RESEARCH

An Efficient movie recommendation
algorithm based on improved k‑clique
Phonexay Vilakone1, Doo‑Soon Park1*, Khamphaphone Xinchang1 and Fei Hao2
*Correspondence:
parkds@sch.ac.kr
1
Department of Computer
Software Engineering,
Soonchunhyang University,
Soonchunhyang‑ro
22, Sinchang‑myeon
336‑745, Asan‑si,
Chungcheongnam‑do, South
Korea
Full list of author information
is available at the end of the
article

Abstract
The amount of movie has increased to become more congested; therefore, to find a
movie what users are looking for through the existing technologies are very hard. For
this reason, the users want a system that can suggest the movie requirement to them
and the best technology about these is the recommendation system. However, the
most recommendation system is using collaborative filtering methods to predict the
needs of the user due to this method gives the most accurate prediction. Today, many
researchers are paid attention to develop several methods to improve accuracy rather
than using collaborative filtering methods. Hence, to further improve accuracy in the
recommendation system, we present the k-clique methodology used to analyze social
networks to be the guidance of this system. In this paper, we propose an efficient
movie recommendation algorithm based on improved k-clique methods which are
the best accuracy of the recommendation system. However, to evaluate the perfor‑
mance; collaborative filtering methods are monitored using the k nearest neighbors,
the maximal clique methods, the k-clique methods, and the proposed methods are
used to evaluate the MovieLens data. The performance results show that the proposed
methods improve more accuracy of the movie recommendation system than any
other methods used in this experiment.
Keywords: Collaborative filtering, Cosine similarity, k-cliques, k nearest neighbor,
Maximal clique, Recommendation system

Introduction
Recommended systems are one of the most important techniques used to introduce
information about user needs, including related services, by analyzing user actions [1,
2]. For the recommender system, a collaborative filtering approach is used to introduce
information that will meet the needs of the user. The collaborative filtering is based on
similarly tasteless users, the same choice, and the idea that users who buy in the past will
buy in the future [3]. Data production factors for the collaborative filtering process are
user interest or user behavior in the form of the feature vector. This vector is paired with
all other user carriers, and the most similar users are selected to be made in the vicinity
of the user. From there, the guide contains information about things previously liked by
users in their neighborhood [4]. However, collaborative filtering often suffers from vulnerabilities [5] that affect the quality of their neighborhood. Use like Cold-start, Sparsity,
and Rating credibility.
© The Author(s) 2018. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
(http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and
indicate if changes were made.

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Latest technologies, user actions, and user private data can be saved to social networks
or e-commerce websites [6]. This type of technology makes it easier to analyze user settings, which is useful for recommender systems [7]. Many researchers are interested in
how community-based networks are as complex as Hui et al. [8] identify k-clique communities among students and use this information to design an effective way of transmitting for mobile networks. There are also k-cliques used in the analysis of social networks
[9, 10] is introduced in the movie recommender system to improve the accuracy of the
movie recommender system. Ryu et al. [11] predicting the unemployment rate using
social media analysis. Hao et al. [12] similarity evolution between graphs: a formal concept analysis approach. Carlos et al. [13] fuzzy linguistic recommender systems for the
selective diffusion of information in digital libraries.
The main purpose of this document is to achieve a more effective solution than collaborative filtering. The proposed movie recommendation system is based on the abstract
maximal clique method. This was the first time that this method of social network
analysis was used to introduce in the movie recommender system, and it is found to
be very efficient. The k-cliques, which are partially graphs that are fully connected to k
vertices [14] and a very effective method to build groups in social networks analysis is
proposed. In the proposed approach, a similarity measure of cosine is used to measure
similarities between users. Then, use k-cliques to create clusters and introduce movie
in similar groups using the collaborative filtering method. The proposed solution offers
improved k-clique methods for more efficient performance than existing collaborative
filtering and maximal clique. The effect of each experiment depends on the value of k.
So to find a more effective solution, the improved k-clique will be offered. The improved
k-cliques method is used to determine that the value of k is the optimal value of the
k-clique method, which provides the maximum accuracy with the recommender system.
The best value of k in k-clique is the value that results in the mean absolute percentage
error to be the minimum value. For performance evaluation, use MovieLens data, which
is general information in movie recommendation systems. To assess the effectiveness of
a MovieLens dataset, it is divided into experimental and test data that are widely used
in artificial intelligence. Comparison of collaborative filtering methods using k nearest
neighbor, maximal clique method, k-clique method, and improve k-clique to evaluate
performance.
The remainder of the article is organized as follows: “Related work” section, presents the relevant work in the field. In “An efficient movie recommendation algorithm
based on improved k-clique” section, the proposed methodology is described in detail.
In “Experimental analysis” section, the experiment will be conducted. The results of
the experiments are discussed and the proposed method by the collaborative filtering
method using the k-nearest neighbor method and the maximal clique method to compare the performance. Finally, in “Conclusion” section, the conclusions are presented
and described in future directions.

Related work
We briefly describe the content needed to describe the proposed improved k-cliques
method and the existing methods used for performance evaluation.

Page 2 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Recommendation systems

It is often referred to as recommender systems, a simple algorithm that aims to provide
relevant and accurate information to users by filtering useful information from large data
sets. The recommender system discovers information patterns in the data set by learning
about consumer choices and generating results relevant to their needs and interests [15].
Recommender systems are becoming more popular and are being used today in many
areas, such as movies, music, news, books, research articles, search terms, social tags,
and products in general. There are also expert systems for collaborators, jokes, restaurants, clothing, financial services, insurance, and more. Most systems recommend the
use of collaborative filtering or content filtering to create a list of recommendations [16].
Collaborative filtering

The idea of a collaborative filtering approach is to collect and analyze a large amount of
information about user actions and settings and then predict which users will favor their
similarity with other users [17]. The advantage of collaborative filtering is that it does
not rely on content that can be analyzed and can accurately represent complex items.
Algorithms are used to calculate user similarities or item similarities in recommender
systems, such as k-nearest neighbors and Pearson correlation. Another collaborative filtering concept is based on assumptions. People who buy in the past will buy in the future
and like the same product them like in the past.
When modeling from user actions, differences often occur between actual and predicted data collection models. One of the most popular examples of collaborative filtering is item-to-item collaborative filtering (Users who bought A also buy B). The
Weaknesses of collaborative filtering methods include cold start, scalability, and sparsity.
There are two types of collaborative filtering methods: memory-based and model-based
collaborative filtering [18].
k‑cliques detection in social network

The k-clique is a complete graph which has k nodes. In complex networks, there are
usually a lot of complete graphs which have different scales. Generally, the value of k
is greater than or equal to at least 3. If k is equal to 2, this means that. There is only an
edge, which has little practical meaning.
Example Fig. 1 shows the undirected graph G including eight nodes and their
relationships.
Evidently, the nodes C, D, E, and F show a 4-clique since these nodes are connected
with each other. In a similar manner, the set of nodes D, F, and G show a 3-clique.
To obtain improved accuracy, various researchers have presented potential new methods. The k-cliques method introduced in social network analysis is introduced in the
movie recommendation system in order to improve the accuracy of the movie recommendation system.
There has been some theoretical and empirical work on how the k-cliques can be
detected in social networks. Hao et al. [10] used k-clique mining in dynamic social networks. Hao et al. [14] used the k-clique method for detecting the social network. Hao et al.
[19] used the k-clique method base on formal concept analysis to community detection in

Page 3 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Page 4 of 15

Fig. 1 An example of k-clique in graph G

the social network. Gregori et al. [20] used a parallel k-cliques to community detection on
the large-scale network. Palla et al. [21] used a CFinder to determine the k-clique community, and subsequently extracted a set of k-clique communities. Kumpula et al. [22] proposed the use of the sequential clique percolation algorithm in order to improve detection
efficiency. CFinder is a tool for finding overlapping clusters in the biological graph based on
k-clique [23]. Saito et al. [24] presented k-dense as well as an efficient method for extracting
the communities from complex networks. Adamcsek et al. [23] provided a faster CFinder to
find the k-cliques. Farkas et al. [25] introduce a clustering algorithm for weighted network
modules using k-clique methods, as the earlier k-clique did not consider weighted graphs
until it was initiated. The edge weights of the discovered k-cliques were measured for their
intensity. When the intensity value was found to be below the threshold, it would not be
considered when building a cluster, and vice versa [25]. Duan et al. [26] solved the problem
of k-clique clustering in a dynamic social network.
Cosine similarity measure

Cosine similarity is a similarity function that is often used in information retrieval, and it is
also one of the most popular similarity calculations applied to text documents, for numerous information retrieval applications [27], as well as clustering [28]. When documents
are represented as vectors, the similarity in two documents corresponds to the correlation
between the vectors. This is quantified as the cosine of the angle between vectors. Given
−
→
−
→
two documents ta and tb , their cosine similarity can be represented as

−
→−
→
−
ta . tb
→
→−


 
SIMC ta , tb = −
→ −
→
 ta  ×  tb 

(1)

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

−
→
−
→
where ta and tb are m-dimensional vectors over the term set T = {t1,…, ­tm}. Each dimension represents a weight in the document, which is non-negative and bounded between
[0, 1]. For example, when combining two identical copies of document d to get a new
pseudo document d’, the cosine similarity between d and d’ is 1, which means that these
two documents are regarded to be identical. At the same time, given another document
l, d and d’ will  have the same similarity value as that of l, that is
→
→
−
→−
−
→−
SIM td , tl = SIM td ′ , tl . Otherwise, documents with the same composition but
different totals will be treated identically. When the term vectors are normalized to a
unit length such as 1, the representation of d and d’ will be the same.

Maximal cliques

A maximal clique is a special clique which cannot be extended by adding any other
nodes [29]. The phrase “maximal clique” is usually used in terms of a sub graph of a
given graph G. So a sub graph H of a graph G is a maximal clique in G if H is isomorphic to a complete graph and there is no vertex v∈V(G)∖V(H) so that v is adjacent to
each vertex of H.
In other words, a sub graph H of a graph G is a maximal clique in G if H is a clique
(there is an edge between every pair of vertices in H) and there is no vertex in G but
not in H that sends an edge to every vertex of H. So we could not create a bigger
clique in G by adding another vertex to H. as shown in Fig. 2 below.
The red sub graph of the first graph is not a clique because there are two vertices
in it not connected by an edge. The red sub graph of the second graph is a clique,
but because there is a vertex in the larger graph connected to all 3 vertices in the sub
graph, it is not a maximal clique. The red sub graph of the third graph is a maximal
clique because it is a clique, and the last vertex not included in the sub graph does not
send an edge to every vertex in the sub graph. The red sub graph of the fourth graph
is a maximal clique because it is a clique, and neither of the vertices not included in
the sub graph send an edge to every vertex in the sub graph. Note that the third and
fourth red sub graphs are both maximal cliques even though the third red sub graph
is larger.

Fig. 2 An example of maximal cliques

Page 5 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

An efficient movie recommendation algorithm based on improved k‑clique
The process of gathering adequate information and workflow for recommendation
systems is shown in Fig. 3. Figure 3 illustrates a movie recommendation system using
the k-clique method.
Process1 in Fig. 3: we need to collect some necessary personalization information
about users. The personalization information that we use here includes gender, age,
and occupation. The new user needs to sign up to the system and provide some necessary personalization information.
Process2 in Fig. 3: we used personalization information from MovieLens data to
make up the experimental data and test data. The experimental data is used to calculate the similarity between users. The similarities in the users are measured with
the help of a cosine similarity measure algorithm. At the end of this process, the adjacency matrix of user similarity is created as shown in Table 1.
Process3 in Fig. 3: as previously described, the adjacency matrix shows the relationship between users. If the value of two users is 1, that means that they have similar
characteristics, otherwise, they are considered not to be similar in characteristics to
other. The adjacency matrix is used to cluster users into several groups based on the
k-clique method. After this process is completed, several clusters of the users may be
presented.
Process4 in Fig. 3: after the clusters of the users are found, we then need to find
the most similar cluster with respect to the new user. In this process, the personalization information of the new user is compared with the personalization information of users in each group using cosine similarity methods to calculate the similarity
between them. After finishing the comparison, the number of users, indicating the
number of similar users in each group, will be counted. Then, the group having the

Fig. 3 Flow chart of proposed recommendation system

Page 6 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Page 7 of 15

Table 1 Adjacency Matrix for Users relationship
User1 User2 User3 User4 User5 User6 User7 User8 User9 User10 ….. User800
User1

1

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

…..

User2

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

…..

User3

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

…..

1

User4

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

…..

0

User5

0

0

1

0

1

0

0

0

0

0

…..

0

User6

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

1

…..

0

User7

1

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

…..

0

User8

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

…..

1

User9

0

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

1

0

…..

0

User10

1

1

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1

…..

0

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

…..

….

0

0

1

0

0

0

0

1

0

0

…..

1

User800 1

1

Table 2 List of the users in the group that the new user belongs to
UserID

UserID in each group

1

4, 717, 832

2

265, 357, 723

3

111, 42, 261,157, 190,…

4

547, 486, 579, 315,329,…

5

733, 38, 342, 544,457,…

6

462, 733, 324, 679, 482,…

7

408, 462, 324, 679, 482,…

8

457, 158, 137, 590, 678

9

225, 438, 891

10

103, 757, 771

…..

………

140

648, 247, 261, 21, 479,…

141

414, 111, 583, 25,233,…

142

355, 581, 814, 510, 512,…

143

547, 486, 579, 315, 329,…

highest number of ones will be chosen as the most similar cluster for the corresponding user, as shown in Table 2 for the result and shown in Fig. 4 for the detail of the
process.
Process5 in Fig. 3: when the group most similar to the new user is found, movies rated
by the group members will be arranged in order of popularity, as movies rated nearest the maximum score will be listed at the top, and movies rated nearest the minimum
score otherwise listed at the bottom, then the top 15 movies which get the maximum
rated will be recommended to the new user, as shown in Table 3. In Table 3, the data are
shown in the first column is referred to the id of the new user and the data are shown in
the second column is referred to the id of the movie.
Process6 in Fig. 3: the top 5 movies on the list will be recommended to the new user. In
addition, it is up to the new user to decide which movies to choose from of the recommended movies.

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Fig. 4 The process of matching the new user to suitable clustering

The detail of the k-clique algorithm shows in the below.
[Algorithm 1] k-Clique Algorithm: This algorithm used to classify users into several groups.
Input: user_training.csv.
Output: group_of_users.
Step 1: initialize mymatrix, sim.
Step 2: for i = 1 to mymatrix do
Step 3: for j = 1 to mymatrix do{
Step 4:
initialize a
Step 5:
for k = 2 to 4 do
Step 6:
if mymatrix[i,k] == mymatrix[j,k]
a[k] = 1
else
a[k] = 0
Step 7:
if (a[2]+a[3]+a[4]) == 3
sim[i,j] = 1
else
sim[i,j] = 0 }
Step 8: initialize my_network, k4, b, d
Step 9: for i = 1 to b do
Step 10: for j = 1 to b do d[i,j] = b[[i]][j]

We describe the improved k-clique method. The process of workflow for improved
k-clique is similarities to the workflow of the k-clique method as shown in Fig. 3. In the
k-cliques, we performed various experimental runs in order to find an improved k-cliques
method. We have created the most appropriate group and recommendation count from
these experimental runs. First, we ran an experiment for a dataset in which the users are the

Page 8 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Page 9 of 15

Table 3 List of the recommended movies to new users
NewUserID

Movie_ID

1

50, 258, 260, 288, 294, ……., 301, 303, 307

2

1, 258, 748, 7, 50, ……., 245, 273, 284

3

118, 258, 300, 748, 1, ……., 405, 597, 25

4

50, 100, 286, 127, 181, ……., 300, 137, 222

5

288, 294, 127, 286, 328, ……., 242, 243, 245

6

288, 294, 286, 50, ……., 275, 313, 100

7

50, 286, 100, 127, 181, ……., 300, 79, 137

8

1, 15, 50, 100, 111, ……., 285, 298, 546, 7

9

237, 286, 15, 50, 100, ……., 282, 471, 476

10

50, 514, 1, 56, 89, ……., 187, 194, 204

11

50, 100, 286, 56, 127, ……., 294, 303, 7

12

294, 300, 748, 118, 222, ……., 69, 79, 83

13

50, 100, 286, 127, 181, ……., 300, 137, 222

14

50, 1, 181, 89, 98, ……., 174, 204, 435

15

50, 69, 98, 144, 181, ……., 79, 82, 91

…

……

135

100, 127, 258, 269, 302, ……., 288, 300, 1

136

50, 258, 181, 288, 100, ……., 286, 300, 222

137

288, 50, 56, 121, 181, ……., 182, 210, 258

138

50, 258, 260, 288, 294, ……., 301, 303, 307

139

258, 50, 300, 288, 100, ……., 56, 294, 318

140

50, 100, 286, 127, 181, ……., 300, 137, 222

141

50, 100, 174, 258, 181, ……., 69, 135, 195

142

258, 50, 181, 288, 300, ……., 56, 172, 117

143

50, 100, 286, 127, 181, ……., 300, 137, 222

randomly-selected users from the list of users who rated at least 20 movies. In this case, we
performed an experiment to cluster users into several groups by using a value of k = 3 to 14
and recommended the movies to the users with the numbers of movies rated being five, 10,
and 15 movies. Afterward, we performed an experiment for the dataset in which the users
are the random user from the list of users who rated at least 50, 100, and 200 movies serially. Then, we recommended the movie to the users with the number of movies rated being
five, 10, and 15 movies successively. We performed 10 runs in order to calculate the accuracy and used the mean value as an accuracy value.
The detail of the Improved k-clique algorithm shows in the below.
[Algorithm 2] Improved k-Clique Algorithm: This algorithm was used to find the best value
of a k-clique method.
Inpout: result1.csv
Output: improvedk_clique
Step 1: initialized improvedk_clique
Step 2: for i = 1 to14 do{
Step 3: initialized hav
Step 4: for j = 1 to 3 do{
Step 5:
for k = 1 to 3 do{
Step 6:
if improvedk_clique[i,j]==improvedk_clique[k,1] hav = hav + 1 }}
Step 7: improvedk_clique[i,1] = i
Step 8: improvedk_clique[i,2] = hav }

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Page 10 of 15

Experimental analysis
The experimental set-up is used to validate the performance of existing approaches and
the proposed approach. For performance evaluation, MovieLens data is used. In order
to evaluate the performance of the MovieLens data, the collaborative filtering method is
examined with the use of a k nearest neighbor, maximal clique method, k-clique method,
and an improved k-clique method in order to evaluate the performance.
Experimental set‑up

In order to implement the proposed method, the hardware and software below were
used in experimentation, as shown in Table 4.
R is a leading tool for machine learning, statistics, and data analysis that is also a programming language. R can be used to create objects, functions, and packages. The R
language is platform-independent so it can be used on any operating system. The installation of R is free, so we can use it without having to purchase a license. It is not only a
statistical package, and is open source, which means that anyone can examine the source
code in order to see what exactly is being done on screen. Anyone can add features and
fix bugs without waiting for the vendor to do this. Thus, it allows for integration with
other languages (C, C++). It also enables you to interact with many data sources and
statistical packages (SAS, SPSS). R has a large, growing community of users. The power
of R is used in academia, data wrangling, data visualization, specificity, machine learning, and availability.
Datasets

The proposed approach is implemented using the MovieLens dataset [30], which is the
most generalized data in movie recommendation systems. This dataset is divided into
experimental data and test data. In the experimental and test data, each of them consists
of 10 random datasets from a user who rated at least 20 movies, another at least 50 movies, another at least 100 movies, and another at least 200 movies. There are 800 users in
the experimental data, 143 users in the test data, and 100,000 ratings from 943 users on
1684 movies. Simple demographic information for users includes age, gender, and occupation. Details of the dataset are given below.
Testing dataset is made of a list of the users’ personalization information record. The
users in the testing dataset are a random list of users from MovieLens dataset. The number of users in the testing dataset is 143, with each user’s data consisting of three categories of personalization information: age, gender, and occupation. The experimental

Table 4 Resources used for experimental set-up
Descriptions

Specification

Operating System

Windows 7 Ultimate Service Pack 1

Processor

Intel® Core™ i5 750 @2.67 GHz

RAM

24 GB

System type

64 bit operating system

Hard Disk

500 GB

Data analysis software

R Studio i386 Version 3.4.0

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Page 11 of 15

Fig. 5 The result of the experiments

dataset is the made of a list of the users’ personalization information record. The users in
the experimental dataset are the remaining users after random selection from the MovieLens dataset. The number of users in the experimental dataset is 800 users, with each
user’s data consisting of three categories of personalization information: age, gender, and
occupation.
Experimental result

The results of the experiment depend upon the various values of k as shown in Fig. 5.
After developing the proposed movie recommendation system using improved
k-cliques, the number of movies that were to be rated by the new user among the movies recommended by the system was predicted. This paper adopts the most widely used
evaluation metric for performance comparison of the proposed recommendation system. The mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) is a method of prediction accuracy of
a forecasting method in statistics that is defined by the formula [31–33]:

MAPE =


n 
100%   At − Ft 

 A
n
t
t

(2)

where At is the actual value and Ft is the forecast value.
We compared the MAPE values with the k-cliques method, the maximal clique
method, and the collaborative filtering using k nearest neighbor method to evaluate the
performance of the proposed method. If the number of outcomes is small it means that
our method is useful. For the calculation of MAPE, Eq. (2) is used. For consistency of
performance, 10 replications were performed for each trial and the mean values were
taken.

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Page 12 of 15

First, we calculated the MAPE for the proposed method. The value of MAPE is 18.85%
(see below) when RM = 5, rated at least 200 movies and value of k = 11.

MAPE =


n 
100%   At − Ft 
 A
 = 18.85%
n
t
t

(3)

The value detail of MAPE using the improved k-cliques is shown in Fig. 5 above. Figure 5 shown that when a number of movies recommended is RM = 5 the minimum value
of MAPE is 18.85% where k = 11 and rated at least 200 movies, when number of movies
recommended RM = 10 the minimum value of MAPE is 20.37% where k = 10 and rated
at least 200 movies, the minimum value of MAPE is 21.41% where k = 11 and rated at
least 200 movies when RM = 15. Therefore, the best number of movies recommend is
RM = 5.
Second, we calculated the MAPE for the Maximal clique method. The value of MAPE
is 28.63% (see below) when RM = 5, rated at least 200 movies.

MAPE =


n 
100%   At − Ft 
 A
 = 28.63%
n
t
t

(4)

The value detail of MAPE using the Maximal cliques is shown in Fig. 6 below. Figure 6 shown that when a number of movies recommended is RM = 5 the minimum
value of MAPE is 28.63% where rated at least 200 movies, when number of movies recommended RM = 10 the minimum value of MAPE is 30.29% where rated at least 200
movies, the minimum value of MAPE is 32.00% where rated at least 200 movies when
RM = 15. Therefore, the best number of movies recommend is RM = 5.
Third, we calculated the MAPE for Collaborative Filtering using a k Nearest Neighbor.
The value of MAPE is 19.69% (see below) when RM = 5, rated at least 200 movies.


n 
100%   At − Ft 
MAPE =
 A
 = 19.69%
n
t
t

(5)

The value detail of MAPE using the Collaborative Filtering using a k nearest neighbor
is shown in Fig. 7 below. Figure 7 shown that when a number of movies recommended
is RM = 5 the minimum value of MAPE is 19.69% where rated at least 200 movies, when
number of movies recommended RM = 10 the minimum value of MAPE is 22.44%
where rated at least 200 movies, the minimum value of MAPE is 24.09% where rated at
least 200 movies when RM = 15. Therefore, the best number of movies recommend is
RM = 5.
Finally, we calculated the mean value result of MAPE of a k-clique method, collaborative filtering using a k nearest neighbor method and a maximal clique method. After
comparing of these methods, the mean value result of MAPE computed by a movie recommendation system based on using the improved k-clique, a movie recommendation
system based on using k-clique, a movie recommendation system based on collaborative
filtering using a k nearest neighbor and that of the movie recommendation system based
on maximal clique algorithm are more accurate and efficiency, as shown in Fig. 8 below.
We also have to argue that the efficiency of the four methods is the best of our method.

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Fig. 6 The value result of mean absolute percentage error using maximal cliques

Fig. 7 The value result of mean absolute percentage error based on collaborative filtering using a k nearest
neighbor

Conclusions
In order to achieve more accuracy than collaborative filtering methods; the maximal
clique method used in social network analysis introduces in this paper is the first time
that used in a movie recommendation system and the output of this method is very
effective. To achieve more accurate; the k-clique method, which is very effective in
social networks, is introduced in this experiment and the output showed this method

Page 13 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Fig. 8 Comparative result of the improved k-clique, k-clique, knn-CF and Maximal clique

was more effective than maximal clique method. Therefore, this paper also proposed an
improved k-cliques method to find the most efficient method than the k-cliques method.
Finally, after several experiments were performed; in terms of the mean absolute percentage error used to calculate, shown in Fig. 5, which is the mean value calculated, the
best method was found when k = 11 and rated at least 200 movies with five movies recommended to the user.
For performance evaluation, we evaluated the collaborative filtering method using
a k nearest neighbor, maximal clique method, k-clique method and improved k-clique
methods. The results showed that the improved k-clique method improved the precision
of the movie recommendation system more than the other methods used in this.
Until now, it takes a long time to calculate the k-clique methods. In future studies,
we will study ways to shorten this time. And data mining method will be used with the
improved k-clique method in the future to increase the accuracy and effectiveness of the
movie recommendation system.
Authors’ contributions
PV collected, reviewed, and classified main literature for the paper, and also completed the writing of this work. PV and
DSP identified the insights of this work and gave Methodology, especially the maximal clique method, k-clique, and
improve k-clique techniques in movie recommendation system. PV and KX improved the part on Performance evalua‑
tion. The supervision has been done by DSP and FH. The validation and visualization have been done by the PV, DSP, KX,
and FH. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Author details
1
Department of Computer Software Engineering, Soonchunhyang University, Soonchunhyang‑ro 22, Sinchang‑myeon
336‑745, Asan‑si, Chungcheongnam‑do, South Korea. 2 School of Computer Science, Shaanxi Normal University, No. 620,
West Chang’an Avenue, Xi’an 710119, China.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning), Korea, under the ITRC
(Information Technology Research Center) support program (IITP-2018-2014-1-00720) supervised by the IITP (Insti‑
tute for Information & communications Technology Promotion) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (No.
NRF-2017R1A2B1008421).
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.

Publisher’s Note

Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

Page 14 of 15

Vilakone et al. Hum. Cent. Comput. Inf. Sci.

(2018) 8:38

Received: 22 October 2018 Accepted: 8 December 2018

References
1. Jeong WH, Kim SJ, Park DS, Kwak J (2013) Performance improvement of a movie recommendation system based on
personal propensity and secure collaborative filtering. J Inf Process Syst 9:157–172
2. Viana P, Pinto JP (2017) A collaborative approach for semantic time-based video annotation using gamification.
Hum Cent Comput Inf Sci 7:13
3. Desrosiers C, Karypis G (2011) A comprehensive survey of neighborhood-based recommendation methods. In: Ricci
F, Rokach L, Shapira B, Kantor P (eds) Recommender systems handbook. Springer, Boston, pp 107–144
4. Bagci H, Karagoz P (2016) Context-aware location recommendation by using a random walk-based approach.
Knowl Inf Syst 47:241–260
5. Wong F, Lee S, Wong Q, Lee S (2015) Points of interest recommendation based on context-aware. Int J Hybrid Inf
Technol 8:55–62
6. Lee D (2015) Personalizing information using users’ online social networks: a case study of CiteULike. J Inf Process
Syst 11:1–21
7. Zou HT, He Y, Zheng S, Yu HL, Hu C (2018) Online group recommendation with local optimization. CMES: 217–231
8. Hui P, Crowcroft J (2008) Human mobility models and opportunistic communications system design. Phil Trans R
Soc A. https​://doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2008.0010:2005-2016
9. Hao F, Park DS, Pei Z (2018) When social computing meets soft computing: opportunities and insights. Hum Cent
Comput Inf Sci 1:8
10. Hao F, Park DS, Min G, Jeong YS, Park JH (2016) k-cliques mining in dynamic social networks based on triadic formal
concept analysis. Neurocomputing 209:57–66
11. Ryu PM (2018) Predicting the unemployment rate using social media analysis. J Inf Process Syst 14:904–915
12. Hao F, Sim DS, Park DS, Seo HS (2017) Similarity evolution between graphs: a formal concept analysis approach. J Inf
Process Syst 13:1158–1167
13. Carlos P, Alberto CL, Juan BM, Alvaro TL, Enrique HV (2017) Fuzzy linguistic recommender systems for the selective
diffusion of information in digital libraries. J Inf Process Syst 13:653–667
14. Hao F, Park DS, Pei Z (2017) Detecting bases of maximal cliques in social networks. MUE2017 1–1
15. Ricci F, Rokach L, Shapira B (2011) Introduction to recommender systems handbook, recommender systems hand‑
book. Springer, Berlin, pp 1–35
16. Jafarkarimi H, Sim ATH, Saadatdoost R (2012) A naïve recommendation model for large databases. Int J Inf Educ
Technol 2:216–219
17. Linden, Gregory D, Smith BR, Zada KN (2015) Automated detection and exposure of behavior-based relationships
between browsable items U.S. Patent 9,070,156
18. Neil R, Mehdi E, Masashi S, Dain K (2016) Active learning in recommender systems handbook, 2nd edn. Springer, US.
ISBN 978-1-4899-7637-6
19. Hao F, Min G, Pei Z, Park DS, Yang LT (2015) K-clique communities detection in social networks based on formal
concept analysis. IEEE Syst J. https​://doi.org/10.1109/jsyst​.24332​94
20. Gregori E, Lenzini L, Mainardi S (2013) Parallel (k)-clique community detection on large-scale networks. IEEE Trans
Parallel Distrib Syst 24:1651–1660
21. Palla G, Derenyi I, Farksa I, Vicsek T (2005) Uncovering the overlapping community structure of complex networks in
nature and society. Nature 435:814–818
22. Kumpula J, Kivela M, Kaski K, Saramaki J (2008) Sequential algorithm for fast clique percolation. Phys Rev E 78:026109
23. Adamcsek B, Palla G, Farkas I, Derenyi I, Vicsek T (2006) CFinder: locating cliques and overlapping modules in biologi‑
cal networks. Bioinformatics 22:1021–1023
24. Saito K, Yamada T, Kazama K (2009) The k-dense method to extract communities from complex networks. In: Zighed
DA, Tsumoto S, Ras ZW, Hacid H (eds) Mining complex data Studies in computational intelligence, vol 165. Springer,
Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 243–257
25. Farkas I, Abel D, Palla G, Vicsek T (2007) Weighted network modules. New J Phys 9:180
26. Duan D, Li Y, Li R, Lu Z (2011) Incremental k-clique clustering in dynamic social networks. Artif Intell Rev 38:129–147
27. Dubey VK, Saxena AK (2016) Cosine similarity based filter technique for feature selection. In: IEEE Int. Conf. on Con‑
trol, Computing, Communication and Materials IEEE, Piscataway, pp 1–6
28. Lahitani AR, Permanasari AE, Setiawan NA (2016) Cosine similarity to determine similarity measure: Study case in
online essay assessment. In: 4th international conference on cyber and IT service management. IEEE, Piscataway, pp
1–6
29. Wen X, Chen WN, Lin Y, Gu TL, Zhang H, Li Y, Yin Y, Zhang J (2017) A maximal clique based multi objective evolution‑
ary algorithm for overlapping community detection. IEEE Trans Evol Comput 21:363–377
30. Harper FM, Konstan JA (2015) The MovieLens datasets: history and context. ACM Trans Interact Intell Syst (TiiS) 5:19
31. Tofallis C (2015) A better measure of relative prediction accuracy for model selection and model estimation. J Op
Res Soc 66:1352–1362
32. Kim S, Kim HY (2016) A new metric of absolute percentage error for intermittent demand forecasts. Int J Forecast
32:669–679
33. Hyndman Rob J, Koehler AB (2006) Another look at measures of forecast accuracy. Int J Forecast 22(4):679–688

Page 15 of 15

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Movie Recommendation System using Contentbased Filtering
Yeole Madhavi B.1, Rokade Monika D.2, Khatal Sunil S.3
1

Student, Department of Computer Engineering, SPCOE Dumbarwadi (Otur), Maharashtra, India
2&3
Assistant Professor, Department of Computer Engineering, SPCOE Dumbarwadi (Otur),
Maharashtra, India

ABSTRACT
There is already enough content available on the movie recommendation system. Showing the movie
recommendations is essential so that the user need not waste a lot of time searching for the content which he/she
might like. Thus, movie recommendation system plays a vital role to get user personalized movie recommendations.
After searching a lot on the internet and referring to a lot of research papers, we got to know that the
recommendations made using Content-based Filtering are using a single text to vector conversion technique and a
single technique to find the similarity between the vectors. In this research work, we have used multiple text to
vector conversion techniques and manipulated the results of the multiple algorithms to get the final recommendation
list. You can think of it as a hybrid approach using the Content-based Filtering technique only.

Keyword: - Movie Recommendations, Content-based Filtering, Text to vector, Vector similarity, Hybrid
approach

1. INTRODUCTION
Due to abundance of information collected till 21st century and the increasing rate of information flowing over the
internet, there is a lot of confusion related to what to consume and what not to consume. Even on YouTube, when
you want to watch a video of a particular concept, generally, there are a lot of videos available out there for you.
Now, since the results are ranked appropriately, there may not be much issue but what if the results were not ranked
appropriately? Well, in that case, we would probably spend a lot of time to find the best possible video which suits
us and satisfies our need. This recommendation results are when you search something on a website. Next time,
when you visit a particular website, without even searching, sometimes the system is able to show you
recommendations which you might like. Isn’t this an interesting feature? So, basically, the job of a recommender
system is to suggest the most relevant items to the user. Recommendation systems are used in YouTube for video
recommendation, Amazon and Flipkart for product recommendation, Netflix and Amazon Prime for movie
recommendation, and so on. Whatever you do on such websites, there is a system which see your behavior and then
ultimately suggest things / items with which you are highly likely to engage. This research paper deals with movie
recommendations and logic behind movie recommendation system, traditional movie recommendation systems,
issues related to traditional movie recommendation systems, and a proposed solution for Artificial Intelligence based
personalized movie recommendation system. A lot of famous movie recommendation related datasets are already
available on Kaggle and other websites. Some of the famous datasets include Movielens dataset, TMDB Movie
Dataset, and the dataset by Netflix itself. Websites like Netflix, Amazon Prime, etc. use movie recommendation to
increase their revenue or profits by ultimately improving the user experience. In fact, there was a competition
conducted by Netflix in the year 2009 with a prize money of nearly 1 million dollars ($1M) for making at least 10%
improvement in the existing system.
As dealt earlier, we have a lot of data available at our exposure and we need to filter the data in order to consume it
because generally we are not interested in each and everything available to us. In order to filter the data, we need
some filtering techniques. There are different types of filtering techniques or movie recommendation algorithms
over which a recommendation system can be based upon.
Major filtering techniques or movie recommendation algorithms are as follows:

14954

www.ijariie.com

633

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

1. Content Based Filtering
2. Collaborative Filtering
3. Hybrid Filtering

Some of these techniques can be further broken into subparts
2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Sang-Min Choi, et. al. [1] mentioned about the shortcomings of collaborative filtering approach like sparsity
problem or the cold-start problem. In order to avoid this issue, the authors have proposed a solution to use category
information. The authors have proposed a movie recommendation system which is based on genre correlations. The
authors stated that the category information is present for the newly created content. Thus, even if the new content
does not have enough ratings or enough views, still it can pop up in the recommendations list with the help of
category or genre information. The proposed solution is unbiased over the highly rated most watched content and
new content which is not watched a lot. Hence, even a new movie can be recommended by the recommendation
system.
George Lekakos, et. al. [2] proposed a solution of movie recommendation using hybrid approach. The authors stated
that Content based filtering and Collaborative filtering have their own shortcomings are can be used in a specific
situation. Hence, the authors have come up with a hybrid approach which takes into consideration both contentbased filtering as well as collaborative filtering. The solution is implemented in 'MoRe' which is a movie
recommendation system. For the sake of pure collaborative filtering, Pearson correlation coefficient has not been
used. Instead, a new formula has been used. But this formula has an issue of 'divide by zero' error. This error occurs
when the users have given same rating to the movies. Hence, the authors have ignored such users. In case of pure
content-based recommendation system, the authors have used cosine similarity by taking into consideration movie
writers, cast, directors, producers and the movie genre. The authors have implemented a hybrid recommendation
method by using 2 variations - 'substitute' and 'switching'. Both of these approaches show results based on
collaborative filtering and show recommendations based on content-based filtering when a certain criterion is met.
Hence, the authors use collaborative filtering technique as their main approach.
Debashis Das, et. al. [3] wrote about the different types of recommendation systems and their general information.
This was a survey paper on recommendation systems. The authors mentioned about Personalized recommendation
systems as well as non-personalized systems. User based collaborative filtering and item based collaborative
filtering was explained with a very good example. The authors have also mentioned about the merits and demerits of
different recommendation systems.
Jiang Zhang, et. al. [4] proposed a collaborative filtering approach for movie recommendation and they named their
approach as 'Weighted KM-Slope-VU'. The authors divided the users into clusters of similar users with the help of
K-means clustering. Later, they selected a virtual opinion leader from each cluster which represents the all the users
in that particular cluster. Now, instead of processing complete user-item rating matrix, the authors processed virtual
opinion leader-item matrix which is of small size. Later, this smaller matrix is processed by the unique algorithm
proposed by the authors. This way, the time taken to get recommendations is reduced.
S. Rajarajeswari, et. al. [5] discussed about Simple Recommender System, Content-based Recommender System,
Collaborative Filtering based Recommender System and finally proposed a solution consisting of Hybrid
Recommendation System. The authors have taken into consideration cosine similarity and SVD. Their system gets
30 movie recommendations using cosine similarity. Later, they filter these movies based on SVD and user ratings.
The system takes into consideration only the recent movie which the user has watched because the authors have
proposed a solution which takes as input only one movie.
Muyeed Ahmed, et. al. [6] proposed a solution using K-means clustering algorithm. Authors have separated similar
users by using clusters. Later, the authors have created a neural network for each cluster for recommendation
purpose. The proposed system consists of steps like Data Preprocessing, Principal Component Analysis, Clustering,
Data Preprocessing for Neural Network, and Building Neural Network. User rating, user preference, and user
consumption ratio have been taken into consideration. After clustering phase, for the purpose of predicting the
ratings which the user might give to the unwatched movies, the authors have used neural network. Finally,
recommendations are made with the help of predicted high ratings.
Gaurav Arora, et. al. [7] have proposed a solution of movie recommendation which is based on users' similarity. The
research paper is very general in the sense that the authors have not mentioned the internal working details. In the
Methodology section, the authors have mentioned about City Block Distance and Euclidean Distance but have not
mentioned anything about cosine similarity or other techniques. The authors stated that the recommendation system

14954

www.ijariie.com

634

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

is based on hybrid approach using context based filtering and collaborative filtering but neither they have stated
about the parameters used, not they have stated about the internal working details.
V. Subramaniyaswamy, et. al. [8] have proposed a solution of personalized movie recommendation which uses
collaborative filtering technique. Euclidean distance metric has been used in oder to find out the most similar user.
The user with least value of Euclidean distance is found. Finally, movie recommendation is based on what that
particular user has best rated. The authors have even claimed that the recommendations are varied as per the time so
that the system performs better with the changing taste of the user with time.
Harper, et. al. [9] mentioned the details about the MovieLens Dataset in their research paper. This dataset is widely
used especially for movie recommendation purpose. There are different versions of dataset available like MovieLens
100K / 1M / 10M / 20M / 25M /1B Dataset. The dataset consists of features like user id, item id / movie id, rating,
timestamp, movie title, IMDb URL, release date, etc. along with the movie genre information.
According to R. Lavanya, et. al. [10], in order to tackle the information explosion problem, recommendation
systems are helpful. Authors mentioned about the problems of data sparsity, cold start problem, scalability, etc.
Authors have done a literature review of nearly 15 research papers related to movie recommendation system. After
reviewing all these papers, they observed that most of the authors have used collaborative filtering rather than
content-based filtering. Also, the authors noticed that a lot of authors have used hybrid-based approach. Even though
a lot of research has been done on recommendation systems, there is always a scope for doing more in order to solve
the existing drawbacks.
Ms. Neeharika Immaneni, et. al. [11] proposed a hybrid recommendation technique which takes into consideration
both content-based filtering approach as well as collaborative filtering approach in a hierarchial manner in order to
show a personalized movie recommendation to the users. The most unique thing about this research work is that the
authors have made movie recommendations using a proper sequence of images which actually describe the movie
story plot. This actually helps for better visuals. The author have also described the graph based recommendation
system, content-based approaches, hybrid recommender systems, collaborative filtering systems, genere correlations
based recommender system, etc. The proposed algorithm has 4 major phases. Initially, social networking website
like Facebook is used to know the user interest. Later, the movie reviews needs to be analysed and the
recommendations needs to be made. Finally, story plot needs to be generated for better visuals.
Md. Akter Hossain, et. al. [12] proposed NERS which is an acronym for neural engine-based recommender system.
The authors have done a successful interaction between 2 datasets carefully. Moreover, the authors stated that the
results of their system are better than the existing systems because they have incorporated the usage of general
dataset as well as the behaviour-based dataset in their system. The authors have used 3 different estimators in order
to evaluate their system against the existing systems.

3. PROPOSED METHODOLGY
We need to perform preprocessing on the dataset and combine the relevant features into a single feature. Later, we
need to convert the text from that particular feature into vectors. Later, we need to find the similarity between the
vectors. Finally, get the recommendations as per the system architecture mentioned below.
1.1. ARCHITECTURE

14954

www.ijariie.com

635

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 1. System Architecture

1.2. DATASET, EXPLORATORY DATA ANALYSIS & PREPROCESSING
The ‘TMDB 5000 Movie Dataset’ is taken into consideration for movie recommendation purpose in this research
work. This dataset is available on kaggle.com. The dataset is composed of 2 CSV files - ‘tmdb_5000_movies.csv’
and ‘tmdb_5000_credits.csv’
The ‘tmdb_5000_movies.csv’ dataset consists of the following attributes:
 ‘budget’: It indicates the budget of the movie.
 ‘genres’: It indicates the genres of the movie like Action, Documentary, etc.
 A movie can have multiple genres.
 ‘homepage’: It indicates the homepage of the movie. It is basically a website link.
 ‘id’: It indicates movie ID.
 ‘keywords’: It indicates the keywords of the movie. Apart from the title of the movie, keywords give a
quick information about the movie.
 ‘original_language’: It indicates whether the movie is originally created in English or other language.
 ‘original_title’: It is nothing but the movie title.
 ‘overview’: It is a short description of the movie.
 ‘popularity’: It is a metric which indicates popularity.
 ‘production_companies’: It consists of the names of companies which has produced the movie.

14954

www.ijariie.com

636

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021











IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

‘production_countries’: It consists of the names of the countries in which the movie production took place.
‘release_date’: It consists of the release date of the movie. The format used is yyyy-mm-dd where ‘yyyy’
indicates year of release, ‘mm’ indicates the month of release, and ‘dd’ indicates the day of release.
‘revenue’: It indicates the revenue earned by the movie.
‘runtime’: It indicates the runtime of a movie. Runtime basically means the length of the movie.
‘spoken_languages’: It consists of the languades spoken in the movie.
‘status’: It indicates the status of the movie. For example, a movie can be released or not released which
basically indicates the status of that movie.
‘tagline’: It consists of the tagline of the movie.
‘title’: It consists of the title of the movie.
‘vote_average’: It indicates the average of the votes.
‘vote_count’: It indicates the vote count.

Fig. 1. Statistical data about ‘tmdb_5000_movies.csv’ dataset using pandas Dataframe.describe() method

Fig. 2. Glimpse of the ‘tmdb_5000_movies.csv’ dataset using ‘Titanic’ movie

The ‘tmdb_5000_credits.csv’ dataset consists of the following attributes:

14954

www.ijariie.com

637

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021





IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

‘movie_id’: It indicates the movie ID.
‘title’: It indicates the title of the movie.
‘cast’: It consists of the cast of the movie. Cast implies the actors and actresses who appear in the movie.
‘crew’: It consists of those people who are concerned with the production of the movie.

Fig. 3. Statistical data about ‘tmdb_5000_credits.csv’ dataset using pandas Dataframe.describe() method

Fig. 4. Glimpse of the ‘tmdb_5000_credits.csv’ dataset using ‘Titanic’ movie

The Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA) has been inspired by Heeral Dedhia’s blog on medium.com.

14954

www.ijariie.com

638

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 5. Top Genres

Movies having the genre as Drama are maximum in number as compared to Family movies and Horror movies. A
movie might have multipe genres.

Fig. 6. Actor with highest appearance

The above figure indicates the actors with the highest appearance in the decreasing order.

14954

www.ijariie.com

639

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 7. Directors with highest movies

The above figure indicates the directors with the highest appearance in the decreasing order.

Fig. 8. Runtime versus Number of movies

As the runtime increases, number of movies are increasing. After certain point, as the runtime increases, the number
of movies decreases. There are some exceptions.

14954

www.ijariie.com

640

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 9. Runtime versus Budget

There are a lot of movies with lower budget and falling in the range of runtime 70 to runtime 150.

Fig. 9. Revenue versus Budget

It can be seen from the above figure that low budget movies have low revenue in general.

14954

www.ijariie.com

641

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 10. Correlation Matrix for ‘tmdb_5000_movies.csv’ dataset

From the above correlation matrix, it can be seen that the diagonal is yellow coloured because similarity of
something with itself is always 1.0, i.e., maximum. Moreover, it can be seen that revenue and vote count have more
similarity as compared to budget and vote count.
Preprocessing steps include removing stopwords, combining the first name and the last name into a single name,
removing punctuation marks, lowercasing the text, etc.

Fig. 11. Director, Keywords, Cast and Genres of a movie are combined into a single feature titled ‘combine_feature’

The ‘combine_feature’ attribute needs to be further processed by using some algorithms.

14954

www.ijariie.com

642

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

1.3. ALGORITHMS
We can use CountVectorizer or TfidfVectorizer or Glove or Word2Vec in order to create vectors from the text.
After converting the text into vectors, we need to find the similarity between the vectors. Cosine Similarity or
sigmoid_kernel or some other technique can be used to find the similarity between the vectors.
1.
Algorithm 1: Content-based Recommendation using CountVectorizer and Cosine Similarity
In this case, we will use CountVectorizer in order to create vectors from the preprocessed text mentioned in the
‘combine_feature’ attribute.
After getting the vectors, we will find the similarity between the vectors using Cosine Similarity.
2.
Algorithm 2: Content-based Recommendation using TfidfVectorizer and Cosine Similarity
In this case, we will use TfidfVectorizer in order to create vectors from the preprocessed text mentioned in the
‘combine_feature’ attribute.
After getting the vectors, we will find the similarity between the vectors using Cosine Similarity.
After getting the recommendations using Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2, get the common movies from both the
recommendations initially. Later, append the remaining movies to the common movies in an alternate fashion.

4. RESULT AND ANALYSIS

Fig. 12. Recommendations similar to ‘The Dark Knight’ movie using Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2

14954

www.ijariie.com

643

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 13. Final Recommendations similar to ‘The Dark Knight’ movie

Fig. 14. Recommendations similar to ‘Avatar’ movie using Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2

14954

www.ijariie.com

644

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 15. Final Recommendations similar to ‘Avatar’ movie

Fig. 16. Recommendations similar to ‘The Godfather’ movie using Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2

14954

www.ijariie.com

645

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 17. Final Recommendations similar to ‘The Godfather’ movie

Fig. 18. Recommendations similar to ‘Titanic’ movie using Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2

14954

www.ijariie.com

646

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

Fig. 19. Final Recommendations similar to ‘Titanic’ movie

4. CONCLUSION
We can see from the results that the final recommendations are slightly better than the individual recommendations
of Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 mentioned in this research work. Hence, it is always better to manipulate the results
of different algorithms to get the final result which has the advantages of the individual algorithms.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Choi, Sang-Min, Sang-Ki Ko, and Yo-Sub Han. "A movie recommendation algorithm based on genre
correlations." Expert Systems with Applications 39.9 (2012): 8079-8085.
[2] Lekakos, George, and Petros Caravelas. "A hybrid approach for movie recommendation." Multimedia tools and
applications 36.1 (2008): 55-70.
[3] Das, Debashis, Laxman Sahoo, and Sujoy Datta. "A survey on recommendation system." International Journal
of Computer Applications 160.7 (2017).
[4] Zhang, Jiang, et al. "Personalized real-time movie recommendation system: Practical prototype and evaluation."
Tsinghua Science and Technology 25.2 (2019): 180-191.
[5] Rajarajeswari, S., et al. "Movie Recommendation System." Emerging Research in Computing, Information,
Communication and Applications. Springer, Singapore, 2019. 329-340.
[6] Ahmed, Muyeed, Mir Tahsin Imtiaz, and Raiyan Khan. "Movie recommendation system using clustering and
pattern recognition network." 2018 IEEE 8th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and
Conference (CCWC). IEEE, 2018.
[7] Arora, Gaurav, et al. "Movie recommendation system based on users’ similarity." International Journal of
Computer Science and Mobile Computing 3.4 (2014): 765-770.
[8] Subramaniyaswamy, V., et al. "A personalised movie recommendation system based on collaborative filtering."
International Journal of High Performance Computing and Networking 10.1-2 (2017): 54-63.
[9] Harper, F. Maxwell, and Joseph A. Konstan. "The movielens datasets: History and context." Acm transactions
on interactive intelligent systems (tiis) 5.4 (2015): 1-19.
[10] R. Lavanya, U. Singh and V. Tyagi, "A Comprehensive Survey on Movie Recommendation Systems," 2021
International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Smart Systems (ICAIS), 2021, pp. 532-536, doi:
10.1109/ICAIS50930.2021.9395759.
[11] N. Immaneni, I. Padmanaban, B. Ramasubramanian and R. Sridhar, "A meta-level hybridization approach to
personalized movie recommendation," 2017 International Conference on Advances in Computing,
Communications and Informatics (ICACCI), 2017, pp. 2193-2200, doi: 10.1109/ICACCI.2017.8126171.

14954

www.ijariie.com

647

Vol-7 Issue-4 2021

IJARIIE-ISSN(O)-2395-4396

[12] M. A. Hossain and M. N. Uddin, "A Neural Engine for Movie Recommendation System," 2018 4th
International Conference on Electrical Engineering and Information & Communication Technology (iCEEiCT),
2018, pp. 443-448, doi: 10.1109/CEEICT.2018.8628128.
[13] Monika D.Rokade ,Dr.Yogesh kumar Sharma,”Deep and machine learning approaches for anomaly-based
intrusion detection of imbalanced network traffic.” IOSR Journal of Engineering (IOSR JEN), ISSN (e): 22503021, ISSN (p): 2278-8719
[14] Monika D.Rokade ,Dr.Yogesh kumar Sharma”MLIDS: A Machine Learning Approach for Intrusion Detection
for Real Time Network Dataset”, 2021 International Conference on Emerging Smart Computing and
Informatics (ESCI), IEEE
[15] Monika D.Rokade, Dr. Yogesh Kumar Sharma. (2020). Identification of Malicious Activity for Network Packet
using Deep Learning. International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology, 29(9s), 2324 - 2331.
[16] 4. Sunil S.Khatal ,Dr.Yogesh kumar Sharma, “Health Care Patient Monitoring using IoT and Machine
Learning.”, IOSR Journal of Engineering (IOSR JEN), ISSN (e): 2250-3021, ISSN (p): 2278-8719
[17] 5. Sunil S.Khatal ,Dr.Yogesh kumar Sharma, “Data Hiding In Audio-Video Using Anti Forensics Technique
ForAuthentication”; IJSRDV4I50349, Volume : 4, Issue : 5
[18] Sunil S.Khatal Dr. Yogesh Kumar Sharma. (2020). Analyzing the role of Heart Disease Prediction System
using IoT and Machine Learning. International Journal of Advanced Science and Technology, 29(9s), 2340 2346.

14954

www.ijariie.com

648

See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/283042228

A Movie Recommender System: MOVREC
Article in International Journal of Computer Applications · August 2015
DOI: 10.5120/ijca2015904111

CITATIONS

READS

72

11,089

4 authors, including:
Manoj Kumar

Dharmendra Kumar Yadav

Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology

Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology

5 PUBLICATIONS 77 CITATIONS

51 PUBLICATIONS 312 CITATIONS

SEE PROFILE

Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:

Cloud scheduling View project

All content following this page was uploaded by Manoj Kumar on 26 November 2021.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

SEE PROFILE

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 124 – No.3, August 2015

A Movie Recommender System: MOVREC
Manoj Kumar

D.K. Yadav

Ankur Singh

Vijay Kr. Gupta

Assistant Professor
Department of
Information and
Technology
BBDNITM Lucknow

Associate Professor
Department of
Computer Science
MNNIT Allahabad
Allahabad

M.Tech (P)
Software
Engineering
BBDU Lucknow
India

Assistant Professor
Department of
Computer Science
BBDNITM Lucknow

ABSTRACT
Now a day’s recommendation system has changed the style of
searching the things of our interest. This is information
filtering approach that is used to predict the preference of that
user.
The most popular areas where recommender system is applied
are books, news, articles, music, videos, movies etc. In this
paper we have proposed a movie recommendation system
named MOVREC. It is based on collaborative filtering
approach that makes use of the information provided by users,
analyzes them and then recommends the movies that is best
suited to the user at that time. The recommended movie list is
sorted according to the ratings given to these movies by
previous users and it uses K-means algorithm for this purpose.
MOVREC also help users to find the movies of their choices
based on the movie experience of other users in efficient and
effective manner without wasting much time in useless
browsing. This system has been developed in PHP using
Dreamweaver 6.0 and Apache Server 2.0. The presented
recommender system generates recommendations using
various types of knowledge and data about users, the available
items, and previous transactions stored in customized
databases. The user can then browse the recommendations
easily and find a movie of their choice.

Keywords
K-means, recommendation system, recommender system, data
mining, clustering, movies, Collaborative filtering, Contentbased filtering

1. INTRODUCTION
In today’s world where internet has become an important part
of human life, users often face the problem of too much
choice. Right from looking for a motel to looking for good
investment options, there is too much information available.
To help the users cope with this information explosion,
companies have deployed recommendation systems to guide
their users. The research in the area of recommendation
systems has been going on for several decades now, but the
interest still remains high because of the abundance of
practical applications and the problem rich domain. A number
of such online recommendation systems implemented and
used are the recommendation system for books at
Amazon.com , for movies at MovieLens.org, CDs at
CDNow.com (from Amazon.com), etc.
Recommender Systems have added to the economy of the
some of the e-commerce websites (like Amazon.com) and
Netflix which have made these systems a salient parts of their
websites. A glimpse of the profit of some websites is shown in
table below:

Netflix

2/3rd of the movies watched are
recommended

Google News

recommendations generate 38% more
click-troughs

Amazon

35% sales from recommendations

Choicestream

28% of the people would buy more
music if they found what they liked

Table1. Companies benefit through recommendation
system
Recommender Systems generate recommendations; the user
may accept them according to their choice and may also
provide, immediately or at a next stage, an implicit or explicit
feedback. The actions of the users and their feedbacks can be
stored in the recommender database and may be used for
generating new recommendations in the next user-system
interactions. The economic potential of theses recommender
systems have led some of the biggest e-commerce websites
(like Amazon.com, snapdeal.com) and the online movie rental
company Netflix to make these systems a salient part of their
websites. High quality personalized recommendations add
another dimension to user experience. The web personalized
recommendation systems are recently applied to provide
different types of customized information to their respective
users. These systems can be applied in various types of
applications and are very common now a day.
We can classify the recommender systems in two broad
categories:
1.

2.

Collaborative filtering approach
Content-based filtering approach

1.1 Collaborative filtering
Collaborative filtering system recommends items based on
similarity measures between users and/or items. The system
recommends those items that are preferred by similar kind of
users. Collaborative filtering has many advantages
1.

It is content-independent i.e. it relies on connections
only

2.

Since in CF people makes explicit ratings so real
quality assessment of items are done.

3.

It provides serendipitous recommendations because
recommendations are base on user’s similarity
rather than item’s similarity.

7

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 124 – No.3, August 2015

1.2 Content-based filtering

Content-based filtering is based on the profile of the user’s
preference and the item’s description. In CBF to describe
items we use keywords apart from user’s profile to indicate
user’s preferred liked or dislikes. In other words CBF
algorithms recommend those items or similar to those items
that were liked in the past. It examines previously rated items
and recommends best matching item.
There are various approaches proposed in various research
papers listed below. These approaches are often combined
in Hybrid Recommender Systems. An earlier study by
Eyjolfsdottir et. al for the recommendation of movies through
MOVIEGEN had certain drawbacks such as , it asks a series
of questions to users which was time taking . On the other
hand it was not user friendly for the fact that it proved to be
stressful to a certain extent. Keeping in mind these
shortcomings, we have developed MovieREC, a movie
recommendation system that recommends movies to users
based on the information provided by the users themselves. In
the present study, a user is given the option to select his
choices from a set of attributes which include actor, director,
genre, year and rating etc. We predict the users choices based
on the choices of the previous visited history of users. The
system has been developed in PHP and currently uses a
simple console based interface.

(1)
Where, k is the number of clusters, n is the number of
cases

is a chosen distance measure between a

data point
and the cluster centre
, is an indicator of
the distance of the n data points from their respective cluster
centers.
The algorithm is composed of the following steps:

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Select K points as initial centroids.
Repeat
From k clusters by assigning each point to its
closest centroid.
Re-compute the centroid of each cluster.
Until Centroid do not change.
Figure 1. K-means Algorithm

2. RELATED WORK
Many recommendation systems have been developed over the
past decades. These systems use different approaches like
collaborative approach, content based approach, a utility base
approach, hybrid approach etc.
Looking at the purchase behavior and history of the shoppers,
Lawrence et al. 2001 presented a recommender system which
suggests the new product in the market. To refine the
recommendation collaborative and content based filtering
approach were used. To find the potential customers most of
the recommendation systems today use ratings given by
previous users. These ratings are further used to predict and
recommend the item of one’s choice.
In 2007 Weng, Lin and Chen performed an evaluation study
which says using multidimensional analysis and additional
customer’s profile increases the recommendation quality.
Weng used MD recommendation model (multidimensional
recommendation model) for this purpose. multidimensional
recommendation model was proposed by Tuzhilin and
Adomavicius (2001).

3. RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
3.1 The Basic K-means Algorithm
The original K-means algorithm was proposed by MacQueen
[20] .The ISODATA algorithm by Ball and Hall[22] was an
early but sophisticated version of k-means. Clustering divides
the objects into meaningful groups. Clustering is unsupervised
learning. Document clustering is automatic document
organization.
In K-means clustering technique we choose K initial
centroids, where K is the desired number of clusters. Each
point is then assigned to the cluster with nearest mean i.e. the
centroid of the cluster. Then we update the centroid of each
cluster based on the points that are assigned to the cluster. We
repeat the process until there is no change in the cluster center
(centroid). Finally, this algorithm aims at minimizing
an objective function, in this case a squared error function.
The objective function

Figure 2: The 5 steps of the K-Means algorithm [3]

3.2 Data Description
In proposed model we use a pre filter before applying Kmeans algorithm. The attributes used to calculate distance of
each point from centroid are
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Genre
Actor
Director
Year
Rating

Different attributes have different weights. In our research we
have found that the most appropriate recommendations that
can be generated should be based on the ratings given to the
movies by previous users, therefore we have given more
importance to the rating attribute than other attributes. These
ratings have been taken from www.imdb.com because
perhaps it has the largest collection of movies along with the
rating given to these movies by a large number of different
users from different parts of the world. Another important
parameter in our proposed model is total number of votes
received by a particular movie. We have divided number of
votes in to three categories that is less than or equal to 1000,
more than 1000 but less than or equal to 10,000 and greater
than 10,000.

8

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 124 – No.3, August 2015
In our research we have found that as the number of vote’s
increases the weight of rating should also increase
respectively. Therefore we have used ratios of 1:1, 1:2, and
1:3 depending on total number of votes received by a movie.
we have also found that the movies which have rating less
than 5 are the ones which are least suitable for
recommendation, and are least desirable by users. Users
generally want to see a good movie and higher rating ensures
that our predicted movie set are of those movies which are
liked by a large number of users. Weights assigned to other
attributes are generally based on the average of total movies
associated with that particular attribute to the total number of
movies in our data set.

3.3 Simulation of MOVREC
When any user enters our system MOVREC he has a couple
of options. He /she can search a particular movie or see
upcoming movies list or can go to our recommendation page.
On recommendation page he is given the choice to
select/input values for different attributes. On the basis of
these input values, we search our search our database and
prepare an array of suitable movies. Movies included in the
array are those whose even one attribute value matches with
the input value of the user. We then calculate the number of
movies in our array with the help of a counter. If the counter
value is less than or equal to twenty we display the movie list
sorted according to ratings associated with the movies. If
number of movies is greater than twenty then we apply a pre
filter and select top twenty movies according to rating. If two
movies have same rating then priority is given to the movie
having a large number of votes. After filtering the movie list
we match the attributes value to their respective weights and
compute the total weight of each movie. Once we have
calculated the total weight of each movie we apply K-means
clustering algorithm on these group of movies. In our research
we have also found that generally a user prefer a list with five
movies so we assume K equal to be 4 so that an average every
K has five movies, where K is the number of cluster to be
formed.
For each cluster k1, k2 , k3, k4 we assume initial centroid c1,
c2, c3, c4 which corresponds to the first, sixth, eleventh, and
sixteenth movie in the movie array. After defining the initial
centroid we compute the distance of all the other data points
from each centroid and assign the remaining data points
(movies) to closest centroid and form clusters. The distance
measure we have used to calculate the distance between data
points and centroid is the Euclidean Distance.
After forming initial clusters we take one cluster at a time. We
again calculate centroids but this time each centroid
corresponds to mean of the points in that cluster. After
recalculating centroids we compute the distance of all data
points with respect to these newly formed centroids and
reassign them to form clusters. We repeat this process till
there is no change in centroids. This ensures that the clusters
finally formed are optimized and no further grouping is
possible. Once final cluster are formed we compute the
average rating of all points belonging to that cluster i.e. cluster
rating, then according to the input user query we display the
cluster having highest cluster rating.

Weightage and matching of attributes
1.

Actor (Wa)
Wa= No. of movies of Actor(a) in data set
Total no. of movies in data set

2.

Director (Wd)
Wd= No. of movies of Director(d) in data set
Total no. of movies in data set

3.

Rating
Weight

Rat
ing

If number of
votes <=1000

If number of
1000< votes
<=10000

If number of
votes >10000

10

10

20

30

9

9

18

27

8

8

16

24

7

7

14

21

6

6

12

18

5
14.9

5

10

15

1

2

3

4.

Genre(Wg)
Wg= No. of movies of Genre(g) in data set
Total no. of movies in data set

5.

Year(Wy)
Wy= No. of movies in Year (Y) in data set
Total no. of movies in data set

Total weight of a particular movie m is given by
Wm= Wr + Wa +Wd +Wg +Wy

3.4 Proposed Algorithm
Input: a number of movies: m
Output: a number of clusters: K
Step 1 Select n movies from m movies n<m
Step 2 If n>20 then select top 20 movies from n movies
based on ratings.
Else display the output movies sorted by rating.
Step 3 If rating of movies x, y are equal i.e. If
Rx= Ry
Then select those movies which have greater
number of user votes.
Step 4 Assume K=4.
Step 5 REPEAT (6, 7)
Step 6 Chose initial centroid C1, C2, C3, C4.
Step 7 Calculate Euclidean distance of all data points
w.r.t. C1, C2, C3, C4 and re-compute the centroid of
each cluster.
Step 8 UNTILL centroid does not change.
Where,

9

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 124 – No.3, August 2015
m: Total number of movies in database
n: Number of movies after user query
x, y: Two random movies
Rx, Ry: Rating of movies x, y
K: Number of cluster
C1, C2, C3, C4: Initial Centroid.

3.5 Challenges Faced
In developing any system the biggest challenge is to satisfy
the end users for which the system is being developed. We
also faced certain challenges while developing our system.
Some of them are:




To have a system that is user friendly and easy to
understand and use.
To create a data set that has all relevant information
about a particular movie.
The biggest challenge was to have the most
appropriate movie recommended list.



To make our system diversifiable so that it can
satisfy users of different geographical locations.



To give weights to different attributes.

3.6 Overcome the problems


The proposed system has been tested over a small
group of people, and we have received a positive
response from them. We have kept our system
simple and interactive for this we have choose php
and java script.



For collecting information we have intensively
search free online movie data bases and extract the
information which was useful for our proposed
system.



To accurately recommend movie to user we have
applied K-means clustering algorithm along with a
pre filter.



We have included movies in our database
irrespective of their language or location so that
users from all across the globe can use our system.



For assigning weights to attributes and for giving
priority to them we have conducted a survey on a
group of people and on the basis of the result
obtained we have prioritize our attributes.

An excerpt of the survey is given below
Name

Actor/
Cast

Genre

Rating

Director

Year

Mrs
Malti
Singh

2

5

1

4

3

K.K
Singh

5

3

1

2

4

Kritika
Baranwal

1

3

2

5

4

Ranjana
Rai

3

2

1

4

5

Dr.
Siddharth
Singh

2

3

1

4

5

Alok
Kumar

1

4

2

5

3

Shashank
Pandey

3

2

1

5

4

3

2

1

4

5

3

1

2

4

5

Er.
Pankaj
Agarwal
Mr.
Girjesh
Mishra

Table 2 . Excerpt of the Survey Conducted
In our survey we have found that almost every user has given
maximum priority to the rating concerned with the movie so
we have given the maximum priority to our rating attribute.
Also we have deduced from our survey that movie rating has
more weight if that movie has received a large number of
votes. So we have divided rating and votes in to three
categories i.e. minimum, medium and maximum votes.

4. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have introduced MovieREC, a recommender
system for movie recommendation. It allows a user to select
his choices from a given set of attributes and then recommend
him a movie list based on the cumulative weight of different
attributes and using K-means algorithm. By the nature of our
system, it is not an easy task to evaluate the performance since
there is no right or wrong recommendation; it is just a matter
of opinions. Based on informal evaluations that we carried out
over a small set of users we got a positive response from
them. We would like to have a larger data set that will enable
more meaningful results using our system. Additionally we
would like to incorporate different machine learning and
clustering algorithms and study the comparative results.
Eventually we would like to implement a web based user
interface that has a user database, and has the learning model
tailored to each user.

5. REFERENCES
[1] Han J., Kamber M., “Data Mining: Concepts and
Techniques”, Morgan Kaufmann (Elsevier), 2006.
[2] Ricci and F. Del Missier, “Supporting Travel Decision
making Through Personalized Recommendation,”
Design Personalized User Experience for e-commerce,
pp. 221-251, 2004.
[3] Steinbach M., P Tan, Kumar V., “Introduction to Data
Mining.” Pearson, 2007.
[4] Jha N K, Kumar M, Kumar A, Gupta V K “Customer
classification in retail marketing by data mining”
International Journal of Scientific & Engineering
Research, Volume 5, Issue 4, April-2014 ISSN 22295518

10

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 124 – No.3, August 2015
[5] Giles C.L., Bollacker K.D., and Lawrence S., “CiteSeer:
An automatic citation indexing system,” in Proceedings
of the third ACM conference on Digital libraries, 1998,
pp. 89–98.
[6] Beel J., Langer S., Genzmehr M., and Nürnberger A.,
“Introducing Docear’s Research Paper Recommender
System,” in Proceedings of the 13th ACM/IEEE-CS
Joint Conference on Digital Libraries (JCDL’13), 2013,
pp. 459–460.
[7] Bethard S and Jurafsky D, “Who should I cite: learning
literature search models from citation behavior,” in
Proceedings of the 19th ACM international conference
on Information and knowledge management, 2010, pp.
609–618.
[8] Bollacker K. D., Lawrence S., and Giles C. L.,
“CiteSeer: An autonomous web agent for automatic
retrieval and identification of interesting publications,” in
Proceedings of the 2nd international conference on
Autonomous agents, 1998, pp. 116–123.
[9] Erosheva E., Fienberg S., and Lafferty J., “Mixedmembership models of scientific publications,” in
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 2004, vol. 101, no. Suppl 1,
pp. 5220–5227.
[10] Ferrara F., Pudota N., and Tasso C., “A KeyphraseBased Paper Recommender System,” in Proceedings of
the IRCDL’11, 2011, pp. 14–25.

[13] Middleton S. E., De Roure D. C., and Shadbolt N. R.,
“Capturing knowledge of user preferences: ontologies in
recommender systems,” in Proceedings of the 1st
international conference on Knowledge capture, 2001,
pp. 100–107.
[14] Zarrinkalam F. and Kahani M., “SemCiR - A citation
recommendation system based on a novel semantic
distance measure,” Program: electronic library and
information systems, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 92–112, 2013.
[15] Schafer J. B., Frankowski D., Herlocker J., and Sen S.,
“Collaborative filtering recommender systems,” Lecture
Notes In Computer Science, vol. 4321, p. 291, 2007.
[16] Seroussi Y., “Utilising user texts to improve
recommendations,” User Modeling, Adaptation, and
Personalization, pp. 403–406, 2010.
[17] Buttler D., “A short survey of document structure
similarity algorithms,” in Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Internet Computing, 2004.
[18] Goldberg D., Nichols D., Oki B. M., and Terry D.,
“[Using collaborative filtering to weave an information
Tapestry],” Communications of the ACM, vol. 35, no.
12, pp. 61–70, 1992.
[19] Beel J., Langer S., and Genzmehr M., “Mind-Map based
User Modelling and Research Paper Recommendations,”
in work in progress, 2014.

[11] Jiang Y., Jia A., Feng Y., and Zhao D.,
“Recommending academic papers via users’ reading
purposes,” in Proceedings of the sixth ACM conference
on Recommender systems, 2012, pp. 241–244.

[20] MacQueen J.. Some methods for classification and
analysis of multivariate observations. In Proc. Of the 5th
Berkeley Symp. On Mathematical Statistics and
Probability, pages 281-297. University of California
Press, 1967.

[12] McNee S. M., Kapoor N., and Konstan J. A., “Don’t look
stupid: avoiding pitfalls when recommending research
papers,” in Proceedings of the 20th anniversary
conference on Computer supported cooperative work,
2006, pp. 171–180.

[21] Ball G. and Hall D.. A Clustering Technique for
Summarizing Multivariate Data. Behavior Science,
12:153-155, March 1967. Bowman, M., Debray, S. K.,
and Peterson, L. L. 1993. Reasoning about naming
systems.

IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org

View publication stats

11
